                                         Received <day> <Month>, <year>;        Revised <day> <Month>, <year>;   Accepted <day> <Month>, <year>

                                         DOI: xxx/xxxx



                                         ARTICLE TYPE

                                         Dexterous Robotic Manipulation using Deep Reinforcement
                                         Learning and Knowledge Transfer for Complex Sparse
                                         Reward-based Tasks
                                         Qiang Wang1 | Francisco Roldan Sanchez2,3 | Robert McCarthy1 | David Cordova Bulens1 | Kevin
                                         McGuinness2,3 | Noel O’Connor2,3 | Manuel Wüthrich4 | Felix Widmaier5 | Stefan Bauer6 | Stephen J.




arXiv:2205.09683v2 [cs.RO] 27 Jan 2023
                                         Redmond1,3

                                         1 University College Dublin, Ireland
                                         2 Dublin City University, Ireland                    Abstract
                                         3 Insight SFI Research Centre for Data

                                          Analytics, Ireland
                                                                                             This paper describes a deep reinforcement learning (DRL) approach that won Phase
                                         4 Harvard University, USA                           1 of the Real Robot Challenge (RRC) 2021, and then extends this method to a more
                                         5 MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen,
                                                                                              difficult manipulation task. The RRC consisted of using a TriFinger robot to manip-
                                           Germany
                                         6 KTH Stockholm, Sweden                              ulate a cube along a specified positional trajectory, but with no requirement for the
                                                                                              cube to have any specific orientation. We used a relatively simple reward function, a
                                         Correspondence
                                         *S.J. Redmond, UCD School of Electrical              combination of a goal-based sparse reward and a distance reward, in conjunction with
                                         and Electronic Engineering, Belfield, Dublin         Hindsight Experience Replay (HER) to guide the learning of the DRL agent (Deep
                                         4, Ireland. Email: stephen.redmond@ucd.ie
                                                                                              Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG)). Our approach allowed our agents to acquire
                                                                                              dexterous robotic manipulation strategies in simulation. These strategies were then
                                                                                              deployed on the real robot and outperformed all other competition submissions, in-
                                                                                              cluding those using more traditional robotic control techniques, in the final evaluation
                                                                                              stage of the RRC. Here we extend this method, by modifying the task of Phase 1 of
                                                                                              the RRC to require the robot to maintain the cube in a particular orientation, while
                                                                                              the cube is moved along the required positional trajectory. The requirement to also
                                                                                              orient the cube makes the agent less able to learn the task through blind exploration
                                                                                              due to increased problem complexity. To circumvent this issue, we make novel use of
                                                                                              a Knowledge Transfer (KT) technique that allows the strategies learned by the agent
                                                                                              in the original task (which was agnostic to cube orientation) to be transferred to this
                                                                                              task (where orientation matters). KT allowed the agent to learn and perform the ex-
                                                                                              tended task in the simulator, which improved the average positional deviation from
                                                                                              0.134 m to 0.02 m, and average orientation deviation from 142◦ to 76◦ during eval-
                                                                                              uation. This KT concept shows good generalization properties and could be applied
                                                                                              to any actor-critic learning algorithm.

                                                                                              KEYWORDS:
                                                                                              Robotic Manipulation, Deep Reinforcement Learning, Real Robot Challenge, Sim-to-Real Transfer,
                                                                                             Transfer Reinforcement Learning
2                                                                                                                           WANG ET AL.


1     INTRODUCTION

Dexterous robotic manipulation is essential in many industrial and domestic settings. Traditional robotic manipulation controllers
often rely on solving inverse kinematic equations 5 . The goal of this approach is to find the robotic joint angle time course to
move the end-effector of a robotic system (arm, gripper, fingers, etc.) to a desired pose 8 . Because the solution to this problem is
not unique, motion primitives (i.e., a set of pre-computed movements that a robot can take in a given environment) are typically
used 9,10 . These primitives can each have a defined cost, allowing the robot to avoid non-smooth or other undesirable transitions.
However, these techniques have poor generalization ability and require complex control system structures. More precisely, they
require significant bespoke tailoring for each novel manipulation task, leading to high implementation times and costs. Moreover,
current state-of-the-art in traditional robotic control strategies generally struggle in unstructured tasks, which require high degrees
of dexterity.
   Reinforcement learning (RL), a data-driven learning approach in which models are trained by rewarding or punishing an agent
that is acting in a particular environment, shows promise 22 to replace traditional robotic control approaches. The goal of this
learning paradigm is to maximize the cumulative sum of scalar or vector reward signals received by the agent in response to the
actions that it takes 39 so that it learns how to interact appropriately with the environment; that is, it learns how to act in order to
maximize the rewards it can receive. However, traditional RL is unable to solve tasks with continuous action and state spaces,
due to their high dimensionality. In other words, there are infinite combinations of states and actions in a continuous space, and
therefore traditional RL algorithms cannot learn the required mappings between state, action, and reward for these problems.
Hence, the field of deep reinforcement learning (DRL) 37 has emerged; a new discipline combining deep learning (DL) 38 and RL,
which inherits the capacity to deal with high-dimensional continuous data from DL and decision-making ability from RL. DRL
methods have been able to obtain outstanding results in robotic manipulation 6,7 .
   However, the data inefficiency of DRL is a major barrier to its application in real-world robotics: real robot data collection is
time-consuming and expensive. Much DRL research to-date has focused on improving these data-efficiency issues. Due to their
generally improved sample complexity, off-policy DRL methods 32,34 are often preferred to on-policy methods 35,11 . Model-based
DRL methods, which explicitly learn a model of the environment, have been used to further improve sample efficiency 13,14,15 ,
and have seen success in real robot settings 16 . Moreover, offline DRL techniques seek to leverage previously collected data to
accelerate learning 17 , and are able to learn dexterous real-world skills such as opening a drawer 18 . Imitation learning methods
provide the policy with expert demonstrations to learn from 19,20 , enabling success in real robot tasks, such as peg insertion 21 .
Finally, simulation-to-real (sim-to-real) transfer methods train a policy quickly and cheaply in simulation before deploying
it on the real robot, where learning is significantly slower, and have notably been used to solve a Rubik’s cube with a robot
hand 22 . To account for simulator modelling errors, and to improve the policies ability to generalize to the real robot, sim-to-real
approaches often employ domain randomization 23,24 or domain adaptation 26,27 techniques. Domain randomization, which has
been particularly effective 22 , randomizes the physics parameters in simulation to learn a robust policy that can adapt to the
partially unknown physics of the real system.
   The costly nature of real-robot experimentation has limited research related to robotic dexterous manipulation. In light of these
issues, the Real Robot Challenge (RRC) 1 aims to advance the state-of-the-art in robotic manipulation by providing participants
with remote access to a TriFinger robotic platform (see Figure 1 (b)) 2 , allowing for free and easy real-robot experimentation. To
further support ease of experimentation, users are also provided with a simulation of this robotic system (see Figure 1 (a)). Full
details can be found in the ‘Protocol’ section of the RRC website1 .
   This paper aims to extend the task of Phase 1 of the RRC 2021 to a more difficult task of moving a cube along a 3D positional
trajectory while also maintaining a desired orientation. The task of Phase 1 of the RRC 2021 consisted of moving a cube along a
defined trajectory. So here we increase the difficulty of this task by requiring the cube orientation to match a target orientation
throughout the trajectory. We formulated both tasks as pure RL problems. The movement-related skills of the robot are entirely
learned in simulation, hence reducing human involvement compared to traditional real-world learning methods. We chose to use
the Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) algorithm, as it was shown to have an excellent performance in handling robotic
manipulation tasks with continuous action and observation spaces 32 . We used a reward function composed of goal-based sparse
rewards in conjunction with Hindsight Experience Replay (HER) 33 to teach the control policy to move the cube to the desired xy
coordinates (in the first task, controlling cube position) and then also orientation (in the extended task). Simultaneously, a dense
distance-based reward is employed to teach the policy to lift the cube to the desired 𝑧 coordinate. Finally, we use a novel concept


    1 https://real-robot-challenge.com/2021
WANG ET AL.                                                                                                                                                                3

that we call knowledge transfer (KT) to facilitate learning during the task requiring cube position and orientation be controlled,
which is based on the strategies previously-learned during the task requiring only the cube position be controlled. Compared
with other methods used to solve a similar task 4,35 , our KT method has the advantage of being easier to implement, and can be
extended to all actor-critic RL algorithms.
   This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes the methodology, including the RRC robotic environment (simulator and
real robot) and manipulation tasks, DRL algorithms, and the novel KT approach. Section 3 outlines the results of the conducted
experiments, and Section 4 discusses our proposed approaches’ potential for use in DRL for robotic manipulation tasks. Finally,
conclusions are drawn on the performance of the proposed approaches in Section 5.


2      METHODS

2.1       Real Robot Challenge (RRC)
We were provided with remote access to well-maintained TriFinger robotic platforms 2 (see Figure 1 (b)) by the Max Planck
Institute for Intelligent Systems (Tübingen/Stuttgart, Germany)2 . To further support ease of experimentation, users are also
provided with a simulated version of the robotic setup (see Figure 1 (a)). The 2021 RRC consists of an initial qualifying phase,
performed purely in simulation, followed by independent Phases 1 and 2, both performed on the real robot. Full details can be
found in the ‘Protocol’ section of the RRC website3 .




(a) Visualisation of the PyBullet simulation environment for the TriFinger robot        (b) The real TriFinger robot used in the RRC 2021. Remote access to this system
used in the RRC 2021.                                                                   was possible, allowing competitors from around the world to test the policies learned
                                                                                        in simulation on the real robot. Competition results are generated from performance
                                                                                        on this real-world system.

Figure 1 The TriFinger robot in: (a) the PyBullet 30 simulation, and; (b) the real world. Three identical robotic fingers are
uniformly placed around the circular arena. The colored cube is the target object that must be moved.




2.1.1         Phase 1 task: Following a 3D position trajectory
Competition participants are tasked with solving the ‘Move Cube on Trajectory’ task. In this task, a cube must be carried along a
goal trajectory, which specifies the Cartesian coordinates at which the cube should be positioned at each time-step4 . The goals
are sampled discretely, and the time interval between the two goals in the training phase can be defined manually. The robot
should react as soon as the new goal is received to obtain a higher score. For the final evaluation, multiple previously-unseen goal

    2 https://is.mpg.de/
    3 https://real-robot-challenge.com/2021
    4 Agents interact with the environment in (discrete) time-steps, which are incremented after the agent takes an action
4                                                                                                                            WANG ET AL.

trajectories must be followed. Each evaluation trajectory consists of 120,000 time-steps, with 10 different coordinates that must be
visited by the cube. The structure of the trajectory is such that the next goal (of 10 in total) is introduced at each of the following
time-steps, 𝑡 ∈ {0, 30000, 40000, 50000, ..., 110000}. The obtained score, 𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑠 is defined by a distance-based weighted criterion:
                                                           ⎛ ‖𝑔 ′ − 𝑔𝑥𝑦 ‖
                                                                        ‖ ‖          ‖⎞
                                                         1 ⎜‖
                                                                               ′
                                               𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑠 = − ‖
                                                               𝑥𝑦       ‖ + ‖𝑔𝑧 − 𝑔𝑧 ‖ ⎟                                            (1)
                                                         2⎜       2𝑑𝑟            𝑑ℎ    ⎟
                                                           ⎝                           ⎠
where 𝑔 ′ 𝑥𝑦 and 𝑔 ′ 𝑧 are the actual 𝑥𝑦 and 𝑧 coordinates of the cube, respectively, and 𝑔𝑥𝑦 and 𝑔𝑧 are the desired 𝑥𝑦 and 𝑧 coordinates
of the cube. 𝑑𝑟 and 𝑑ℎ are constants representing the radius of the arena floor and the maximum height the fingertips can reach. A
higher score, averaged across all tested trajectories, implies a better manipulation performance.
   Unlike end-to-end pick-and-place manipulation, the goals are continuously changing in this task. Various action strategies, such
as pushing, cradling, or pinching, must be dynamically employed to move the cube in response to the changing positional goals.


2.1.2       Extended task with increased difficulty: Position and orientation trajectory
We extended the task described above by introducing the an orientation trajectory goal in addition to the positional goal; this was
inspired by the most challenging task in the RRC 20205 , where the cube must not only be moved to the desired position but
also aligned with the desired orientation. The task in 2020 is a single end-to-end movement, rather than trajectory. Hence, we
integrated position, orientation, and trajectory together to create a more challenging task that we named Move Cube on Trajectory
Pro. To evaluate performance during this task we used the criterion used in RRC 2020 (c.f., Eq. (2))
                                                           ‖( ( ))−1 ( )‖
                                               𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑠+𝑜𝑟𝑖 = −‖ 𝑅 𝑔𝑜′       𝑅 𝑔𝑜 ‖ + 𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑠                                          (2)
                                                           ‖                    ‖
where the 𝑔 ′ 𝑜 and 𝑔𝑜 are the achieved orientation and the desired orientation, respectively, described using quaternions. R is
the rotation matrix derived from the quaternions representation and −1 is the inverse matrix operator. Note, 𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑠 from Eq. (1) is
incorporated in the calculation of 𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑠+𝑜𝑟𝑖 to evaluate the cube’s position.


2.2      Simulated environment
2.2.1       Actions and observations
Pure torque control of the robot arms is employed with an update frequency of 20 Hz (i.e., each time-step in the environment is
0.05 seconds). The robot has three arms, with three motorized joints in each arm; thus, the action space is 9-dimensional (and
continuous). Observations include: (i) robot joint positions, velocities, and torques; (ii) cube’s current pose (i.e., its position and
orientation, which in simulation is read directly from the simulator with no measurement error, and for the real world arena is
estimated using provided computer vision object detection and segmentation methods), along with the difference between the
poses at current and previous time-steps; and (iii) the current goal pose. In total, the observation space has 44 dimensions for the
Move Cube on Trajectory task, and 48 for the Move Cube on Trajectory Pro.
   In the Move Cube on Trajectory task, there are three target variables (three Cartesian position coordinates). In the Move Cube
on Trajectory Pro task, there are seven target variables, representing 3D position and an additional four quaternion variables
representing 3D orientation.


2.2.2       Episodes
In each simulated training and testing episode, the robot begins in its default position. The simulator instantiates the cube and the
arena environment, with the cube’s initial position randomly sampled from the arena floor. Each episode lasts 90 time-steps, and
the goal trajectory contains three desired goals, which are randomly sampled from the arena 3D space. The intervals between
goals are same; i.e., the goal changes every 30 time-steps.




    5 https://real-robot-challenge.com/2020
WANG ET AL.                                                                                                                                                    5


2.2.3             Domain randomization
To help the learned policy generalize from a potentially inaccurate simulation to the real environment, we used some basic
domain randomization (DR) techniques6 (i.e., physics randomization). This includes uniformly sampling, from a specified range,
parameters of the simulation physics (e.g., robot mass, restitution, damping, friction; see our code for more details7 ) and cube
properties (mass and width) for each episode. To account for noisy real robot actuation and observations, uncorrelated noise is
added to actions and observations during simulated episodes.
  DR is only applied in the Move Cube on Trajectory task, since it requires sim-to-real transfer. In our final approach, we train
the agent initially in the simulated non-DR environment for 300 epochs to allow it to learn the optimal policy quickly and easily.
Afterward, the agent is tuned in the simulated DR environment for 100 epochs to enhance its robustness, before deploying to the
real TriFinger robot.


2.3           Learning algorithm
The goal-based nature of the Move Cube on Trajectory and Move Cube on Trajectory Pro tasks makes HER a good choice of
learning algorithm; HER has excelled in similar goal-based robotic tasks 33 and obviates the need for complex reward engineering.
As such, we combine DDPG and HER to make our RL algorithm8 . However, in our early experiments we observed that the
standard DDPG plus HER learning algorithm was slow in learning to lift the cube. To resolve this issue, we slightly altered the
HER process and incorporated an additional dense reward which encourages cube-lifting behaviors. We describe these elements
of the learning algorithm below.


2.3.1             Goal-based Reinforcement Learning
We frame the RRC robotic environment as a Markov decision process (MDP), defined by the tuple (, , , 𝑝, 𝑟, 𝛾, 𝜌0 ). , , and 
are the state, action and goal spaces, respectively. The state transition distribution is denoted as 𝑝(𝑠′ |𝑠, 𝑎), the initial state distribution
as 𝜌0 (𝑠), and the reward function as 𝑟(𝑠, 𝑔). 𝛾 ∈ (0, 1) discounts future rewards. The goal of the RL agent is to find the optimal
                                                                                                                              ∑∞
policy 𝜋 ∗ that maximizes the expected sum of discounted rewards in this MDP over all time, t: 𝜋 ∗ = argmax𝜋 𝔼𝜋 [ 𝑡=0 𝛾 𝑡 𝑟(𝑠𝑡 , 𝑔𝑡 )].


2.3.2             Deep Deterministic Policy Gradients (DDPG)
             32
DDPG is an off-policy RL algorithm which, in the goal-based RL setting, maintains the following neural networks: a policy
(actor) 𝜋 ∶  ×  → , and an action-value function (critic) 𝑄 ∶  ×  ×  → ℝ. The critic is trained to minimize the
loss 𝑐 = 𝔼(𝑄(𝑠𝑡 , 𝑔𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 ) − 𝑦𝑡 )2 , where 𝑦𝑡 = 𝑟𝑡 + 𝛾𝑄(𝑠𝑡+1 , 𝑔𝑡+1 , 𝜋(𝑠𝑡+1 , 𝑔𝑡+1 )). To stabilize the critic’s training, the targets 𝑦𝑡
are produced using slowly updated polyak-averaged versions of the main networks. The actor is trained to minimise the loss:
𝑎 = −𝔼𝑠 [𝑄(𝑠, 𝑔, 𝜋(𝑠, 𝑔))], where gradients are computed by backpropagating through the combined critic and actor networks.
For these updates, the transition tuples (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑔𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 , 𝑟𝑡 , 𝑠𝑡+1 , 𝑔𝑡+1 ) are sampled from a replay buffer which stores previously collected
experiences (i.e., off-policy data).


2.3.3             Hindsight Experience Replay (HER)
        33
HER can be used with any off-policy RL algorithm in goal-based tasks, and is most effective when the reward function is sparse
and binary (e.g. equation (3)). To improve learning in the sparse reward setting, HER employs a simple trick when sampling
previously collected transitions for policy updates: a proportion of sampled transitions have their goal 𝑔 altered to 𝑔 ′ , where 𝑔 ′ is
a goal achieved later in the episode. The rewards of these altered transitions are then recalculated with respect to 𝑔 ′ , leaving the
altered transition tuples as (𝑠𝑡 , 𝑔𝑡′ , 𝑎𝑡 , 𝑟′𝑡 , 𝑠𝑡+1 , 𝑔𝑡+1
                                                            ′
                                                                ). Even if the original episode was unsuccessful, these altered transitions will
teach the agent to achieve 𝑔 , thus accelerating its acquisition of skills.
                              ′



2.3.4             Rewards and HER
In our approach, the reward function that guides the RL agent’s learning consists of three components: (i) a sparse reward based
on the the cube’s 𝑥𝑦 coordinates, termed 𝑟𝑥𝑦 ; (ii) a dense reward based on the cube’s 𝑧 coordinate, termed 𝑟𝑧 (the coordinate

    6 Our domain randomization implementation is based on the benchmark code from the 2020 RRC 3 .
    7
        https://github.com/RobertMcCarthy97/rrc_phase1
    8 Our DDPG + HER implementation is taken from https://github.com/TianhongDai/hindsight-experience-replay, and uses hyperparameters largely based on 28 .
6                                                                                                                        WANG ET AL.

frame can be seen in Figure 1 (a)); and (iii) a sparse reward based on the cube’s 3D orientation (used in the Move Cube on
Trajectory Pro task only).
   The sparse 𝑥𝑦 reward, 𝑟𝑥𝑦 , is calculated as:
                                                    {            ‖            ‖
                                                        0    if ‖𝑔 ′ 𝑥𝑦 − 𝑔𝑥𝑦 ‖ ≤ 2 cm
                                              𝑟𝑥𝑦 =              ‖            ‖                                                 (3)
                                                        −1 otherwise
where 𝑔 ′ 𝑥𝑦 are the 𝑥𝑦 coordinates of the achieved goal (the actual 𝑥𝑦 coordinates of the cube), and 𝑔𝑥𝑦 are the 𝑥𝑦 coordinates of
the desired goal.
   The dense 𝑧 coordinate reward, 𝑟𝑧 , is defined as:
                                                      ‖             ‖
                                                 ⎧−𝑎 ‖𝑧𝑐𝑢𝑏𝑒 − 𝑧𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙 ‖ if 𝑧𝑐𝑢𝑏𝑒 < 𝑧𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙
                                                 ⎪    ‖             ‖
                                           𝑟𝑧 = ⎨                                                                               (4)
                                                 ⎪ −𝑎 ‖              ‖
                                                             − 𝑧𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙 ‖ if 𝑧𝑐𝑢𝑏𝑒 > 𝑧𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙
                                                 ⎩ 2 ‖  𝑧
                                                      ‖ 𝑐𝑢𝑏𝑒         ‖
where 𝑧𝑐𝑢𝑏𝑒 and 𝑧𝑔𝑜𝑎𝑙 are the 𝑧 coordinates of the cube and goal, respectively, and 𝑎 is a parameter which weights 𝑟𝑧 relative to
𝑟𝑥𝑦 ; we use 𝑎 = 20.
   The sparse reward for the orientation is defined as:
                                         {           ‖( ( ))−1 ( )‖
                                           0     if ‖ 𝑅 𝑔𝑜′        𝑅 𝑔𝑜 ‖ ≤ 0.384 rad (i.e., 22◦ )
                                  𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑖 =             ‖                    ‖                                                     (5)
                                           −1 otherwise
where the 𝑔 ′ 𝑜 and 𝑔𝑜 are the achieved orientation and the desired orientation represented as quaternions. R indicates rotation
matrix calculation and −1 is the matrix inverse operator. We set the position (2 cm) and orientation (22◦ ) thresholds as per
Andrychowicz et al. 12 .
   Another pure distance-based reward is also used as a comparator for our position-based reward scheme. This reward is popular
in the field because of its clear geometric meaning and its computational efficiency:
                                                                 ‖ ′          ‖
                                                         𝑟𝑑𝑖𝑠 = −‖𝑔𝑥𝑦𝑧 − 𝑔𝑥𝑦𝑧 ‖                                                (6)
                                                                 ‖            ‖
where 𝑔 𝑥𝑦𝑧 and 𝑔𝑥𝑦𝑧 are the achieved 𝑥𝑦𝑧 coordinates and the desired 𝑥𝑦𝑧 coordinates of the cube.
         ′

   For the position-only Move Cube on Trajectory task, we only apply HER to the 𝑥𝑦 coordinates of the goal; i.e., the 𝑥𝑦
coordinates of the goal can be altered in hindsight, but the 𝑧 coordinate remains unchanged. Thus, our HER altered goals are:
       ′
𝑔̂ = (𝑔𝑥𝑦 , 𝑔𝑧 ), meaning only 𝑟𝑥𝑦 is recalculated after HER is applied to a transition sampled during policy updates. This reward
system is motivated by the following:
    1. Using 𝑟𝑥𝑦 with HER allows the agent to learn to push the cube around in the early stages of training, even if it cannot yet
       lift the cube to reach the 𝑧 coordinate of the goal. As the agent learns to push the cube around in the 𝑥𝑦 plane of the arena
       floor, it can then more easily stumble upon actions which lift it. Importantly, the approach of using 𝑟𝑥𝑦 with HER requires
       no bespoke reward engineering.
    2. 𝑟𝑧 aims to explicitly teach the agent to lift the cube by encouraging minimization of the vertical distance between the cube
       and the goal. It is less punishing when the cube is above the goal, serving to further encourage lifting behaviours.
    3. In the early stages of training, the cube mostly remains on the floor. During these stages, most 𝑔 ′ sampled by HER will be
       on the floor. Thus, applying HER to 𝑟𝑧 could often lead to the agent being punished for briefly lifting the cube. Since we
       only apply HER to the 𝑥𝑦 coordinates of the goal, our HER altered goals, ̂𝑔, maintain their original 𝑧 height. This leaves
       more room for the agent to be rewarded by 𝑟𝑧 for any cube lifting it performs.
  In the Move Cube on Trajectory Pro task, the reward of the positional components is same as above. HER is applied on
the orientation and thus the HER altered goals are 𝑔̂ = (𝑔𝑥𝑦
                                                          ′     ′
                                                             , 𝑔𝑜𝑟𝑖 , 𝑔𝑧 ). Finally all items are summed to form the final reward,
𝑟 = 𝑟𝑥𝑦 + 𝑟𝑧 + 𝑟𝑜𝑟𝑖


2.3.5      Goal trajectories
In each episode, the agent is faced with multiple goals; it must move the cube from one goal to the next along a given trajectory.
To ensure the HER process remains meaningful in these multi-goal episodes, we only sample future achieved goals, 𝑔 ′ , (to
replace 𝑔) from the period of time in which 𝑔 was active.
WANG ET AL.                                                                                                                                                                  7

   In our implementation, the agent is unaware that it is dealing with trajectories: when updating the policy with transitions
(𝑠𝑡 , 𝑔𝑡 , 𝑎𝑡 , 𝑟𝑡 , 𝑠𝑡+1 , 𝑔𝑡+1 ) we always set 𝑔𝑡+1 = 𝑔𝑡 , even if in reality 𝑔𝑡+1 was different9 . Thus, the policy focuses solely on achieving
the current active goal and is unconcerned with any future changes in the active goal.


2.3.6         Exploration vs exploitation
We derive our DDPG-HER hyperparameters from Plappert et al. 28 , who use a highly exploratory policy when collecting data in
the environment: with 30% probability a random action is sampled (uniformly) from the action space, and when policy actions
are chosen, Gaussian noise is applied. This is beneficial for exploration in the early stages of training, however, it can be limiting
in the later stages when the policy must be fine-tuned; we found that the exploratory policy repeatedly drops the cube due to the
randomly sampled actions and the injected action noise. To resolve this issue, rather than slowly reducing the level of exploration
each epoch (which would require a degree of hyperparameter tuning), we make efficient use of evaluation episodes (which are
performed by the standard exploitation policy) by adding them to the replay buffer. Thus, 90% of rollouts added to the buffer are
collected with the exploratory policy, and the remaining 10% with the exploitation policy. This addition was sufficient to boost
final success rates in simulation from 70-80% to >90% (where "success rate" is equivalent to that seen in Figure 2 ).




Figure 2 Success rate vs experience collected during simulated training (1 day in simulator, ≈ 1.7 million environment steps).
We took the average over 3 randomly-selected seeds for this illustration. The solid dotted lines are the trend lines and the faded
lines are the raw data. An episode is deemed successful if, when complete, the final goal of the trajectory has been achieved. We
compare training with: (i) Our final method where HER is applied to 𝑟𝑥𝑦 but not to 𝑟𝑧 (red); (ii) HER applied to both 𝑟𝑥𝑦 and
𝑟𝑧 (green); (iii) HER applied to a standard sparse reward where 𝑥𝑦𝑧 are calculated together (blue); (iv) HER applied to pure
distance reward, 𝑟𝑑𝑖𝑠 , where 𝑥𝑦𝑧 are calculated together (orange); and (v) Pure distance reward, 𝑟𝑑𝑖𝑠 , without HER (purple); (vi)
Standard sparse reward without HER (black).




      9 Interestingly, we found that exposing the agent (during updates) to transitions in which 𝑔
                                                                                                  𝑡+1 ≠ 𝑔𝑡 hurt performance significantly, perhaps due to the extra uncertainty
this introduces to the DDPG action-value estimates.
8                                                                                                                                                            WANG ET AL.


2.4        Knowledge transfer
The signal from our computationally-simple reward rarely guides the agent to focus on playing with the cube in the early training
stage; hence, the agent’s learning relies heavily on pure exploration. However, its arbitrary exploration is unlikely to explore
actions that change the cube’s orientation. Unlike the position-only Move Cube on Trajectory task, the orientation exploration
in the Move Cube on Trajectory Pro task is comparatively more difficult, requiring the cube to be both lifted and rotated
simultaneously. To this end, we introduce our KT approach, which transfers a trained agent’s knowledge (teacher) to another
untrained agent (student), or uses the teacher’s knowledge to assist the student with learning. In our case, we train a teacher
from the position-only Move Cube on Trajectory task, and train students in the Move Cube on Trajectory Pro task. The teacher’s
transferred knowledge increases the likelihood of the student discovering useful actions to control the orientation of the cube
through exploring in the early stages of training, instead of exploring all possible actions at random, as the student has been
transferred the knowledge required to control the cube’s position; in this way, we expect the agent to learn how to control the
cube’s orientation more quickly. We use two strategies to ensure the teacher’s guidance is not too biased toward position-based
exploration: 1) increasing the action noise in the early stages of exploration; 2) choose a teacher that has weaker performance in
the Move Cube on Trajectory task (i.e., success rate of only 80%).
   We have the following three implementations of KT. We name them differently for ease of explanation later.

    1. ACTOR-CRITIC: Initialise the student’s actor and critic10 network weights by loading the teacher’s trained weights.

    2. ACTOR: Initialise the student’s actor network weights by loading the teacher’s trained weights and randomly initialize the
       student’s critic.

    3. COLLECT: The student does not inherit any network weights from the teacher. The teacher only helps the student to
       collect experience in the early stages of training. Both the student’s actor and critic networks are randomly initialized.
       As the teacher’s knowledge is not updated in the new task, the collected experience lacks diversity. Hence, we force the
       teacher’s participation to decay as training progresses, allowing the students to engage in exploration further, making the
       experience more beneficial to the student.

    4. SCRATCH: The attempt to solve the Move Cube on Trajectory Pro task, ‘from scratch’, without using KT. This is used for
       comparing KT approaches.


2.5        Train, test, and evaluate
The structure of the neural networks and hyperparameters that we used for training are shown in Appendix A. All training and
testing were performed on the Sonic high performance cluster at University College Dublin, Ireland. For our training, jobs are
randomly assigned to Dell machines configured with R640 2x Intel Xeon Gold 6152 (2.1 GHz, 22 cores) or C6200 V2 2x Intel
E5-2660 v2 (2.2 GHz, 10 cores). In each training run, eight RL agents are assigned to eight processors and run in parallel. At the
end of each training step, the neural network weights of eight agents are synchronized by averaging. The experiences collected by
agents are stored in their respective experience replay buffers and will not be shared. The global success rate and reward are
calculated by averaging the local values from eight agents.

     • Training: For the Move Cube on Trajectory task, each job runs for 300 epochs, overall interacting with the simulated
       environment for 21.6 million time-steps (2.7 million time-steps for each RL agent). The neural network of each agent is
       updated 15,000 times and synchronization is performed after each update. For the Move Cube on Trajectory Pro task, the
       number of training epochs is increased to 500, and other training parameters increased proportionally.

     • Testing: Testing is performed after each training epoch. Each agent runs for 900 time-steps in the simulator. Experience
       collected from testing is stored in the replay buffer. The neural network losses, success rates and rewards of eight agents
       are averaged and saved.

     • Real robot evaluation of Move Cube on Trajectory: For the Move Cube on Trajectory task performed on the real TriFinger
       robot, we adopt the evaluation criteria set by the RRC 2021. For each evaluation episode, a random goal trajectory is

    10 The actor is typically a policy function, which outputs actions to interact with the environment. The critic uses approximate architecture and simulations to learn a

value function, which is then used to update the actors’ policy parameters 40 .
WANG ET AL.                                                                                                                                                          9




                   (a) Pushing                                              (b) Cradling                                              (c) Pinching

             Figure 3 The various manipulation strategies learned by the agent: (a) pushing; (b) cradling; (c) pinching.


        sampled. Each test run keeps 120,000 time-steps, with 10 different goals (first goal at first time-step, then 30,000 time-steps
        to the second goal, and 10,000 time-steps for each of the remaining 8 goals after that). The domain gap between simulation
        and reality was significant, and generally led to inferior scores on the real robot. Policies often struggled to gain control of
        the real cube which appeared to slip more easily from the fingers than in simulation. Additionally, on the real robot, policies
        could become stuck with a fingertip pressing the cube into the wall. As a heuristic solution to this issue, we assumed
        the policy was stuck whenever the cube had not reached the goal’s 𝑥𝑦 coordinates for 50 consecutive time-steps; then
        uniformly sampled random actions were taken for 7 time-steps in an attempt to free the policy from its stuck state.


3      RESULTS

3.1       RRC 2021 Phase 1
3.1.1         Learning outcomes of RL agents
Our method is highly effective in simulation. The algorithm can learn from scratch to proficiently grasp the cube and lift it along
goal trajectories. Figure 2 compares the training performance of our final algorithm (red curve) to that of other combinations11 .
Our algorithm appears to converge stably and more quickly than either HER applied to a standard sparse reward or HER applied
to both 𝑟𝑥𝑦 and 𝑟𝑧 . Furthermore, HER plays a crucial role in the success of our algorithm. The pure DDPG agent finds it difficult
to learn from sparse rewards without HER, and the convergence speed is extremely slow for an agent guided by this traditional
distance-based reward.
   Throughout different training runs, our policies learned several different manipulation strategies, the most distinct of which
included: ‘pushing’ the cube on the arena floor; (ii) ‘cradling’ the cube with all three of its forearms (not fingertips); and (iii)
‘pinching’ the cube with two fingertips and supporting it with the third (see Figure 3 ).
   Our final policies transferred to the real robot with reasonable success. Table 1 displays the self-reported scores of our
best pinching and cradling policies under RRC Phase 1 evaluation conditions. As a baseline comparison, we trained a simple
‘pushing’ policy which ignores the height component of the goal and simply learns to push the cube along the floor to the goal’s
𝑥𝑦 coordinates. The pinching policy performed best on the real robot, and is capable of carrying the cube along goal trajectories
for extended periods of time, and of recovering the cube when it is dropped. This policy was submitted for the official RRC Phase
1 final evaluation round and obtained the winning score 31 (see 12 , username ‘thriftysnipe’).




    11 These runs did not use domain randomization. Generally we trained from scratch in standard simulation before fine-tuning in a domain-randomized simulation.
    12 https://real-robot-challenge.com/2021#nav-results
10                                                                                                                                     WANG ET AL.


Table 1 Self-reported (i.e., not reported by competition organizers) evaluation scores of our learned pushing, cradling, and
pinching policies when deployed on the simulated and real robots (mean ± standard deviation ( ||e(SD)   score)over 10 episodes).
                                                                                                                               ( Scores     )
                                                                                     1 ∑𝑛
                                                                                                  𝑡 ||
                                                                                                          |𝑒𝑡𝑧 |
are based on the cumulative position error of the cube during an episode: 𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑠 = − 2 𝑡=0          𝑥𝑦
                                                                                                  𝑑𝑟
                                                                                                       +   𝑑ℎ
                                                                                                                 , where e 𝑡
                                                                                                                             =  𝑒 𝑡
                                                                                                                                    , 𝑒
                                                                                                                                  𝑥 𝑦 𝑧
                                                                                                                                       𝑡 𝑡
                                                                                                                                        , 𝑒
is the error between the cube and goal position at time-step 𝑡, 𝑑𝑟 the arena floor radius, and 𝑑ℎ the range on the z-axis.

                                                Pushing                    Cradling                   Pinching
                         Simulation       -20,399 ± 3,799             -6,349 ± 1,039             -6,198 ± 1,840
                         Real robot       -22,137 ± 3,671            -14,207 ± 2,160            -11,489 ± 3,790



Table 2 Evaluated score of RL agents trained under three different random seeds. The RRC organizing institute has a small
number of real robots available for remote use, with a small but expected variation in the physical parameters of each arena
and the performance of each robot. The evaluations are performed on three of these robots, chosen at random, named Roboch1,
Roboch5 and Roboch6, to increase the generalizability of the results. Each evaluation is repeated 15 times (15 goal trajectories)
with 120,000 time-steps in each repeat. The results from the simulator are also shown in the Sim subcolumns. The raw results
before averaging are shown in Appendix B2 .

                           Seed 0                            Seed 123                           Seed 200                   Average over seeds
   Robot
               Robch1   Robch5   Robch6   Sim     Robch1   Robch5   Robch6   Sim     Robch1   Robch5   Robch6   Sim      Real robots      Sim
 (Real/Sim)
  Reward       -12175   -11300   -9913            -9308    -8926    -10017           -16266   -13120   -15750
                                          -5447                              -6376                              -7277   -11864±3181    -6367±920
    Avg                 -11129                             -9417                              -15045




3.1.2         Agents trained from different random seeds behave differently
We verified that discrepancies exist between agents’ performances when trained from different random seeds (see Table 2 ) 41 ; for
detailed experimental results before averaging, please see Appendix B2 . In our case, the random seed is used to randomly reset
the environment and randomize actions so that agents can explore in the training phase. Interestingly, the best performing agent
(Seed 0 in Table 2 ) in the simulator had a relatively poor performance on the real robot. This agent overfits to the simulator
environment, and hence the acquired policy has low generalization capability. The agent train under (random) Seed 200 (see
Table 2 ) did not obtain the optimal policy and performed the worst on the real robot.


3.1.3         Domain randomization improves real robot performance
The performance of agents on the real robot significantly improved after tuning using DR (see Table 3 ), the detailed experimental
results can be seen in Appendix B1 , B2 and B3 . Among these agents, the agent trained from Seed 123 achieved simulator-
level performance. Nonetheless, using DR from the beginning of training is not recommended (at least for our algorithm). In a
domain-randomized simulation environment, the agent will be hindered in learning the optimal policy, compared to the policy
learned in the standard simulation environment that does not use domain randomization (see Figure 4 ), and hence will achieve
poor performance on the real robots (see Table 3 ). A demonstration video of this trained network in action can be seen in
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0Lpod542T9k



3.2      Move Cube on Trajectory Pro
Figure 5 compares the training performance of different approaches to learning the Move Cube on Trajectory Pro task, including
using our proposed KT scheme compared to not using it. Agents’ overall rewards are decomposed into position and orientation
components so that the learning outcomes of the two components can be compared.
   Training using the combined DDPG and HER algorithm (not using KT, see SCRATCH curve in Figure 5 ) completely fails in
the Move Cube on Trajectory Pro task, with rewards on all components staying at their small values. In contrast, agents in all three
KT methods shows learning trends. Among them, both COLLECT and the SCRATCH use randomly initialized neural networks.
However, with the help of the experience collected by the teacher, COLLECT shows a more successful learning performance.
WANG ET AL.                                                                                                                       11




          Figure 4 Comparison between agents trained from scratch with domain randomization (DR) and without.


Table 3 Evaluation rewards of different agents evaluated in simulation and on real robots; three seeds used in this paper.
Scratch(DR) represents the agent trained from scratch using DR from the beginning of training. Scratch(NDR) is the agent
trained from scratch without using DR; Scratch(NDR) + Tune(DR) is the agent firstly trained from scratch without DR and then
subsequently tuned using DR in a second training phase. The raw results before averaging are shown in Appendix B1 , B2 and
B3 .

                            Seed                      Type                      Simulation       Real robot
                                                   Scratch(DR)                     -8808           -16685
                              0                   Scratch(NDR)                     -5447           -11129
                                            Scratch(NDR) + Tune(DR)                -5825            -8922
                                                   Scratch(DR)                     -9873           -15726
                             123                  Scratch(NDR)                     -6376            -9417
                                            Scratch(NDR) + Tune(DR)                -6253            -7030
                                                   Scratch(DR)                    -11779           -15398
                             200                  Scratch(NDR)                     -7277           -15045
                                            Scratch(NDR) + Tune(DR)                -6147            -8535
                                                   Scratch(DR)                -9913 ± 1866      -15936 ± 749
                    Average over seeds            Scratch(NDR)                 -6367 ± 920     -11864 ± 3181
                                            Scratch(NDR) + Tune(DR)            -6075 ± 250      -8162 ± 1132


   By transferring the teacher’s knowledge of how to perform the position-only task to the ACTOR-CRITIC student, the
ACTOR-CRITIC excels in its ability to reach position targets from the beginning of training. This makes it more likely that the
ACTOR-CRITIC will discover actions which change the cube’s orientation and are rewarded. All agents learn orientation from
scratch, while the ACTOR-CRITIC has a better learning performance than that of COLLECT. However, the COLLECT agent
relies strongly on the experience collected by the teacher in the early stages of training, although we set a decay on the teacher’s
participation over time. Although the ACTOR agent inherits the knowledge of the teacher’s actor, it performs the worst among all
12                                                                                                                                                WANG ET AL.

KT strategies. Because the randomly-initialized critic is not compatible with the well-trained actor, and the critic’s feedback
cannot meet the actor’s expectations; hence, the actor’s performance worsens.
  The evaluation results are shown in Table 4 and the raw results before averaging are shown in Appendix B4 . All three
methods enable the student agent to learn the Move Cube on Trajectory Pro task, but behave differently. Among them, the
ACTOR-CRITIC agent can achieve comparable performance to the teacher at reaching position targets, and learn to perform




                (a) Position reward vs training time.                                                  (b) Orientation reward vs training time.




                                                  (c) Combined position and orientation (i.e., pose) reward.

             Figure 5 Learning curves showing rewards achieved by agents using different learning algorithms.
WANG ET AL.                                                                                                                        13


Table 4 The average deviations between achieved and desired position/orientation over 15 evaluation episodes in the simulator;
each episode lasts 120,000 time-steps. The deviations are self-customized to see the learning outcomes intuitively. For the position:
devdis = ||𝑔 ′ 𝑥𝑦𝑧 − 𝑔𝑥𝑦𝑧 ||, which can measure the distance between the actual position of the cube and the goal position. For the
orientation: devangle = ||(𝑅(𝑔𝑜′ ))−1 𝑅(𝑔𝑜 )||, which can measure the angle difference between the actual and target orientations. The
deviations of all time-steps are accumulated and finally averaged. The raw results before averaging are shown in Appendix B4 .

                                                   ACTOR-CRITIC           ACTOR       COLLECT         SCRATCH         TEACHER
    Average position deviation devdis (m)                  0.023            0.066         0.031           0.134           0.024
    Average orientation deviation devangle (◦ )             75.8             98.6          84.9           142.2           126.2


very well on reaching orientation targets. A demonstration video of this trained network in action can be seen here: https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=GhkCqoMqxU4.



4      DISCUSSION

Deep reinforcement learning shows promise for solving robotic manipulation tasks requiring dexterity. Compared with traditional
robot control methods, it requires less bespoke engineering work and often has better performance, as shown in our results. We
have only tried our approach using the DDPG learning algorithm; other later published DRL algorithms, such as SAC 34 or TD3 36
may have superior performance, and will be the focus of our future research.
   Although DRL approaches for solving robotic manipulation tasks are outstanding, the algorithm is somewhat training and
sample inefficient. For example, solving the Move Cube on Trajectory task takes roughly 10 million environment steps to converge
(equivalent to 6 days of simulated experience), while a large part of the time is spent in blind exploration of the environment. The
KT method we developed can reduce blind exploration in the initial stage and, more importantly, avoid repeated learning of the
same knowledge in different experimental trials. It can improve resource utilization efficiency. A future similar, but innovative
research direction would be to train a master teacher with broad knowledge in complex environments and use it widely in various
downstream tasks 25 . Another important direction for future work would be to increase sample efficiency, perhaps achievable via
a model-based reinforcement learning approach 14,29 .
   The reward function is the driver of DRL; a well-designed and well-shaped reward can improve the quality and speed of DRL 4 .
A bespoke reward function might limit the utility of a method to a small range of tasks, and is likely costly to develop. In contrast,
goal-based sparse rewards can be easily created. Compared to shaped rewards, goal-based sparse rewards have an extremely
weak reward signal. The agent can only get the a reward when succeeding in the task; otherwise, it gets punished. However,
the probability of success in some tasks is very low, and a dearth of positive feedback hinders improvement in the task. HER
can effectively enhance sparse reward signals by modifying the experience data before giving it to the agent. Typically, HER
replaces the goal with the posterior state, making the prior-posterior transition highly likely to succeed by the action applied to
the prior state. HER has been proven to work wonders 33 in sparse-reward-based tasks, as verified in our case. In addition, our
distance-based dense reward can effectively accelerate the agent’s learning in the early stages of training, and its implementation is
straightforward. We have only validated the approach of mixing sparse and dense rewards for this specific case so far. Indeed, we
know from past experience that this method is not required for some "lifting" tasks, such as OpenAI’s 42 FetchPickAndPlace-v0,
in which the robot has a two-finger gripper that can lift the object relatively easily. However, lifting the object in the 𝑧-direction
using the RRC’s TriFinger robot is much more difficult, requiring dexterous cooperation between three fingers. Therefore, we
enhance the 𝑧-direction reward signal to accelerate the initial stages of training when random exploration is unlikely to lift the
object. However, from our experience we can provide the anecdote that excessive use of dense rewards can diminish the benefit
of the HER algorithm, which is designed to work with sparse rewards. Hence our method has an appropriate mix of sparse and
dense rewards which balances the benefits of using sparse rewards with HER against having dense rewards to acquire difficult
skills earlier in learning. We think the principle of our approach can be generalised, but it is not yet clear how to engineer a
reward function with the optimal mix of sparse and dense rewards in general.
   Sim-to-real transfer is an essential means of bringing robotic learning into reality. Training an intelligent robotic controller in
the real world is expensive and impractical. Take an example of a problem we faced before: we tried to collect the data from the
real TriFinger robots to train an agent from scratch; however, a large number of interactions caused a lot of friction between the
finger and the cube, resulting in wear and tear, which adhered to the surface of the cube and interfered with the estimation of the
14                                                                                                                         WANG ET AL.

cube’s pose by machine vision algorithms. Indeed, the main limitation of our approach was the absence of any real-robot data.
It is likely that some fine-tuning of the policy on real data would greatly increase its robustness in the real environment, and
developing a technique which could do so efficiently is one direction for future work.
   Different from the training of a traditional deep learning model, the training of a deep reinforcement learning model requires a
large amount of random exploration. Pseudorandom number sequences are generated to drive this (pseudo)random exploration.
However, if the same seed is provided to the pseudorandom number generator for the same experiment, the same sequence of
exploratory actions will be performed; in this sense the outcome of the reinforcement learning activity is deterministic. The
network learned may always converge on the same solution, irrespective of the initial seed chosen. But empirically this is not the
case, and the choice of initial seed does influence the performance of the network that is learned. Changing the seed provided to
the pseudorandom number generator would allow the sensitivity of the solution to this initial seed to be evaluated; however,
this is obviously a very time-consuming process. In this paper, we evaluate three candidates seeds (arbitrarily, integers 0, 123,
and 200) to give an indication of the sensitivity of the training process to seed selection. The results show that the reward score
achieved varied by ±27% of the mean across these three seeds. Hence, this shows that when deploying the DRL controller on a
robot, the best-performing agent might be selected from a range of policies learned using different seed values.
   The development of DRL-driven robotic manipulation is still an unsolved problem, but is currently receiving a lot of attention
from the research community. Solving this problem will have a huge impact on industry and society in general. At present,
the training of DRL agents is mostly carried out in the simulator, using perfect feedback data which is mostly vision-based.
The current capabilities of simulators to render realistic mechanics, including the friction, texture, and deformations at contact
interfaces between robotic fingers and the objects they manipulate, are very basic. However, as such simulations improve, and the
ability of real world robots to sense these same contact mechanics advances in tandem, we can expect significant improvements
in the dexterity of DRL-based robotic manipulation systems. This ability to dexterously interact with and learn from the world is
surely the path to developing systems with superior intelligence.




5     CONCLUSION

Our relatively simple reinforcement learning approach fully solves the Move Cube on Trajectory task in simulation. Unlike the
RRC 2020 benchmark solution 3 , this was achieved with the use of minimal domain-specific knowledge. Reproducing our method
is highly feasible, since only one machine with eight processors is required; no GPUs are required. The number of agents can be
set to more if an increase in training speed is desirable. Or, the number of agents can be set to less, but sacrificing training speed.
   Moreover, our learned policies can be successfully deployed on the real robot through our DR tuning approach, which bridges
the large sim-to-real domain gap and allows the achievement of near-simulator-level performance on real robots. In the RRC
2021, which used the Move Cube on Trajectory task, requiring only position targets be reached, we outperformed all competing
submissions, including those employing more classical robotic control techniques.
   Our novel KT approach can enable an agent to perform more useful interactions with the environment in the early stages
of learning, helping to avoid exploration actions that do not result in learning experiences. It allows the complex Move Cube
on Trajectory Pro task to be solved efficiently in the simulator. Additionally, KT increases resource utilization efficiency,
avoiding repeatedly re-learning similar skills. It may be feasible to deploy this method in any actor-critic RL algorithm, and the
implementation method is straightforward.




ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This publication has emanated from research conducted with the financial support of Science Foundation Ireland under grant
numbers 17/FRL/4832 and SFI/12/RC/2289_P2 and of China Scholarship Council (CSC No.202006540003). For the purpose
of Open Access, the author has applied a CC BY public copyright licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising
from this submission. We acknowledge the Research IT HPC Service at University College Dublin for providing computational
facilities and support that contributed to the research results reported in this paper.
WANG ET AL.                                                                                                                     15


References

1. Bauer, S., Widmaier, F., Wüthrich, M., Funk, N., De Jesus, J.U., Peters, J., Watson, J., Chen, C., Srinivasan, K., Zhang, J. and
   Zhang, J., 2021. A Robot Cluster for Reproducible Research in Dexterous Manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.10957.
2. Wüthrich, M., Widmaier, F., Grimminger, F., Akpo, J., Joshi, S., Agrawal, V., Hammoud, B., Khadiv, M., Bogdanovic, M.,
   Berenz, V. and Viereck, J., 2020. TriFinger: An open-source robot for learning dexterity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.03596.
3. Funk, N., Schaff, C., Madan, R., Yoneda, T., De Jesus, J.U., Watson, J., Gordon, E.K., Widmaier, F., Bauer, S., Srinivasa,
   S.S. and Bhattacharjee, T., 2021. Benchmarking structured policies and policy optimization for real-world dexterous object
   manipulation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 7(1), pp.478-485.
4. Allshire, A., Mittal, M., Lodaya, V., Makoviychuk, V., Makoviichuk, D., Widmaier, F., Wüthrich, M., Bauer, S., Handa,
   A. and Garg, A., 2021. Transferring dexterous manipulation from GPU simulation to a remote real-world TriFinger. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2108.09779.
5. Liu, R., Nageotte, F., Zanne, P., de Mathelin, M. and Dresp-Langley, B., 2021. Deep reinforcement learning for the control of
   robotic manipulation: a focussed mini-review. Robotics, 10(1), p.22.
6. Nguyen, H. and La, H., 2019, February. Review of deep reinforcement learning for robot manipulation. In 2019 Third IEEE
   International Conference on Robotic Computing (IRC) (pp. 590-595). IEEE.
7. Kober, J., Bagnell, J.A. and Peters, J., 2013. Reinforcement learning in robotics: A survey. The International Journal of
   Robotics Research, 32(11), pp.1238-1274.
8. Wei, Hui, Yijie Bu, and Ziyao Zhu. "Robotic arm controlling based on a spiking neural circuit and synaptic plasticity."
   Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 55 (2020): 101640.
9. Cohen, Benjamin J., Sachin Chitta, and Maxim Likhachev. "Search-based planning for manipulation with motion primitives."
   2010 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation. IEEE, 2010.
10. Stulp, F., Theodorou, E., Kalakrishnan, M., Pastor, P., Righetti, L. and Schaal, S., 2011, September. Learning motion primitive
   goals for robust manipulation. In 2011 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (pp. 325-331).
   IEEE.
11. Schulman, J., Levine, S., Abbeel, P., Jordan, M. and Moritz, P., 2015, June. Trust region policy optimization. In International
   Conference on Machine Learning (pp. 1889-1897). PMLR.
12. Andrychowicz, O.M., Baker, B., Chociej, M., Jozefowicz, R., McGrew, B., Pachocki, J., Petron, A., Plappert, M., Powell, G.,
   Ray, A. and Schneider, J., 2020. Learning dexterous in-hand manipulation. The International Journal of Robotics Research,
   39(1), pp.3-20.
13. Deisenroth, Marc, and Carl E. Rasmussen. "PILCO: A model-based and data-efficient approach to policy search." Proceedings
   of the 28th International Conference on machine learning (ICML-11). 2011.
14. Janner, M., Fu, J., Zhang, M. and Levine, S., 2019. When to trust your model: Model-based policy optimization. Advances
   in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32.
15. Hafner, D., Lillicrap, T., Ba, J. and Norouzi, M., 2019. Dream to control: Learning behaviors by latent imagination. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1912.01603.
16. Nagabandi, A., Konolige, K., Levine, S. and Kumar, V., 2020, May. Deep dynamics models for learning dexterous
   manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning (pp. 1101-1112). PMLR.
17. Levine, S., Kumar, A., Tucker, G. and Fu, J., 2020. Offline reinforcement learning: Tutorial, review, and perspectives on
   open problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01643.
18. Nair, A., Dalal, M., Gupta, A. and Levine, S., 2020. Accelerating online reinforcement learning with offline datasets. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2006.09359.
19. Pastor, P., Hoffmann, H., Asfour, T. and Schaal, S., 2009, May. Learning and generalization of motor skills by learning from
   demonstration. In 2009 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (pp. 763-768). IEEE.
20. Johns, Edward. "Coarse-to-Fine Imitation Learning: Robot Manipulation from a Single Demonstration." arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2105.06411 (2021).
21. Vecerik, M., Hester, T., Scholz, J., Wang, F., Pietquin, O., Piot, B., Heess, N., Rothörl, T., Lampe, T. and Riedmiller, M.,
   2017. Leveraging demonstrations for deep reinforcement learning on robotics problems with sparse rewards. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1707.08817.
22. Akkaya, I., Andrychowicz, M., Chociej, M., Litwin, M., McGrew, B., Petron, A., Paino, A., Plappert, M., Powell, G., Ribas,
   R. and Schneider, J., 2019. Solving Rubik’s cube with a robot hand. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07113.
16                                                                                                                       WANG ET AL.

23. Peng, X.B., Andrychowicz, M., Zaremba, W. and Abbeel, P., 2018, May. Sim-to-real transfer of robotic control with dynamics
   randomization. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) (pp. 3803-3810). IEEE.
24. Tobin, J., Fong, R., Ray, A., Schneider, J., Zaremba, W. and Abbeel, P., 2017, September. Domain randomization for
   transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world. In 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
   Robots and Systems (IROS) (pp. 23-30). IEEE.
25. Johns, E. (2021, May). Coarse-to-fine imitation learning: Robot manipulation from a single demonstration. In 2021 IEEE
   International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) (pp. 4613-4619). IEEE.
26. Arndt, K., Hazara, M., Ghadirzadeh, A. and Kyrki, V., 2020, May. Meta reinforcement learning for sim-to-real domain
   adaptation. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) (pp. 2725-2731). IEEE.
27. Eysenbach, B., Asawa, S., Chaudhari, S., Levine, S. and Salakhutdinov, R., 2020. Off-dynamics reinforcement learning:
   Training for transfer with domain classifiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.13916.
28. Plappert, M., Andrychowicz, M., Ray, A., McGrew, B., Baker, B., Powell, G., Schneider, J., Tobin, J., Chociej, M., Welinder,
   P. and Kumar, V., 2018. Multi-goal reinforcement learning: Challenging robotics environments and request for research. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1802.09464.
29. McCarthy, R., & Redmond, S. J. (2021). Imaginary Hindsight Experience Replay: Curious Model-based Learning for Sparse
   Reward Tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.02414.
30. Coumans, E., and Bai, Y., 2016 - 2021. PyBullet, a Python module for physics simulation for games, robotics and machine
   learning. In http://pybullet.org.
31. McCarthy, Robert, Francisco Roldan Sanchez, Qiang Wang, David Cordova Bulens, Kevin McGuinness, Noel O’Connor,
   and Stephen J. Redmond. "Solving the Real Robot Challenge using Deep Reinforcement Learning." arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2109.15233 (2021).
32. Lillicrap, T. P., Hunt, J. J., Pritzel, A., Heess, N., Erez, T., Tassa, Y., and Wierstra, D. (2015). Continuous control with deep
   reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.02971.
33. Andrychowicz, M., Wolski, F., Ray, A., Schneider, J., Fong, R., Welinder, P., McGrew, B., Tobin, J., Pieter Abbeel, O. and
   Zaremba, W., 2017. Hindsight experience replay. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30.
34. Haarnoja, T., Zhou, A., Hartikainen, K., Tucker, G., Ha, S., Tan, J., Kumar, V., Zhu, H., Gupta, A., Abbeel, P. and Levine, S.,
   2018. Soft actor-critic algorithms and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905.
35. Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A. and Klimov, O., 2017. Proximal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1707.06347.
36. Fujimoto, S., Hoof, H. and Meger, D., 2018, July. Addressing function approximation error in actor-critic methods. In
   International Conference on Machine Learning (pp. 1587-1596). PMLR.
37. Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Graves, A., Antonoglou, I., Wierstra, D. and Riedmiller, M., 2013. Playing Atari with
   deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602.
38. LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y. and Hinton, G., 2015. Deep learning. Nature, 521(7553), pp.436-444.
39. Sutton, R.S. and Barto, A.G., 1999. Reinforcement learning. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 11(1), pp.126-134.
40. Konda, V. and Tsitsiklis, J., 1999. Actor-critic algorithms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 12.
41. Henderson, P., Islam, R., Bachman, P., Pineau, J., Precup, D. and Meger, D., 2018, April. Deep reinforcement learning that
   matters. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (Vol. 32, No. 1).
42. Brockman, G., Cheung, V., Pettersson, L., Schneider, J., Schulman, J., Tang, J. and Zaremba, W., 2016. OpenAI Gym. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1606.01540.
WANG ET AL.                                                                                                                          17




              (a) The structure of actor neural network.                               (b) The structure of critic neural network.

Figure A1 The neural network structure of the actor and critic. The action output by the actor multiplies the max action ratio
before applying it to the environment to make sure it cannot exceed the limits of the action space.




APPENDIX

A NEURAL NETWORK

A.1 Architecture
The code used in our work is mostly from https://github.com/TianhongDai/hindsight-experience-replay., and we have made some
edits to adapt it to our environment. The code of Move Cube on Trajectory can be found here https://github.com/RobertMcCarthy97/
rrc_phase1, and the code of Move Cube on Trajactary Pro can be found here https://github.com/wq13552463699/rrc_pos_ori.
The structures of the actor and critic neural networks are shown in Figure A1 .


A.2 Hyper-parameter
Hyperparameter related to the task/training/testing can be seen in the sub-folder 𝑟𝑟𝑐_𝑒𝑥𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒_𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑘𝑎𝑔𝑒∕ℎ𝑒𝑟∕𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑠.𝑝𝑦 of
the GitHub repositories above.

   • Learning rate of the actor: 0.001

   • Learning rate of the critic: 0.001

   • Discount factor: 0.98

   • Batch size: 256

   • The average coefficient for soft-update of the target networks: 0.95

   • Replay buffer size: 1,000,000

   • HER replay strategy: future
18                                                                                                                 WANG ET AL.


B RAW DATA


Table B1 The evaluated scores of DRL agents trained with different seeds on both simulator and real robot. All DRL agents are
trained with DR from scratch. We did not run multiple times for each agent on the real robot, because agent performances are
generally poor. This table is the a part of the raw data of Table 3 , before averaging.

                                            Seed 0            Seed 123          Seed 200
                                Num      Rob1     Sim      Rob6      Sim      Rob5     Sim
                                  1     -12115 -8288      -15639 -9200       -10120 -8379
                                  2     -15167 -9430      -14262 -12781      -16159 -12284
                                  3     -23378 -8290       -8257 -10560      -21487 -9197
                                  4     -21338 -10045     -11242 -9759       -23810 -7111
                                  5     -25971 -7998      -11947 -8762       -10207 -9745
                                  6     -13497 -8878      -18063 -8536       -12042 -9183
                                  7     -17905 -9567      -13341 -10685      -12958 -9670
                                  8     -22253 -9332      -15494 -10022      -15986 -15520
                                  9     -11608 -7669      -12824 -7113       -18867 -10239
                                 10     -11805 -8351      -21261 -15298      -17593 -8557
                                 11     -10500 -8677      -20369 -9053       -16410 -16587
                                 12     -19996 -9367      -23302 -9123       -18469 -11242
                                 13     -20676 -8585      -18059 -8727       -11228 -13206
                                 14     -12666 -7764      -18087 -8337       -10918 -12380
                                 15     -11413 -9877      -13749 -10143      -14727 -23389
                                Avg     -16686 -8808      -15726 -9873       -15399 -11779




Table B2 The evaluated scores of DRL agents trained with different seeds on both simulator and real-robot. All DRL agents are
trained from scratch without DR. This table is the raw data of Table 3 and Table 2 before averaging.

                           Seed 0                             Seed 123                            Seed 200
       Num    Rob1     Rob5     Robo6    Sim      Rob1     Rob5     Rob6     Sim      Rob1     Rob5     Rob6     Sim
         1     -9970   -11190 -11512     -5635    -8789    -7328 -10030      -6579   -22824   -12436 -11927      -6965
         2    -11412    -9017 -11461     -5029    -8086   -10263 -13828      -6650   -12288   -10107 -19633      -7464
         3    -10746   -12084 -10900     -5175   -11328    -9908     -8270   -7180   -10859    -9501 -17123      -8839
         4     -7572   -15767 -11904     -5570    -9928    -8228     -9110   -6314   -19834   -11469 -15823      -5422
         5    -10883   -10430 -13682     -5430   -13106    -8263 -10662      -5746   -13174   -17859     -9643   -7505
         6     -7896   -11427 -10371     -5895   -11644   -10245     -6619   -5932   -18568   -14007 -17594      -7324
         7     -7942   -14505 -14028     -4977    -6447   -11307 -12355      -6106   -12754   -10631 -11542      -6473
         8     -8461   -11135 -13604     -5698    -9180    -7481 -11375      -6551   -21177   -11721 -14255      -6009
         9     -6441   -12871 -9460      -4921   -10841    -6781     -7524   -6560   -12986   -11987 -15043      -7716
        10    -11466   -11620 -10030     -5702    -4951    -8415 -10385      -6257   -10326   -12408 -17208      -8291
        11     -9513    -5192 -15004     -5259    -9020    -8248     -7751   -6055   -18069   -11129 -19162      -7405
        12    -11928   -10046 -11051     -6016    -6250    -9530 -11040      -6722   -19168   -19332 -18368      -6590
        13    -14798   -11213 -12311     -5027    -8987   -10205 -11442      -7148   -15011   -15671 -15546      -8015
        14    -10501   -12419 -16049     -5531    -8834    -9002     -9852   -6101   -23270   -17366 -19554      -6483
        15     -9178   -10589 -11256     -5847   -12243    -8691 -16036      -5732   -13678   -11187 -13829      -8657
       Avg     -9914   -11300 -12175     -5448    -9309    -8926 -10017      -6376   -16266   -13121 -15750      -7277
WANG ET AL.                                                                                                                     19




Table B3 The evaluated scores of DRL agents trained with different seeds on both simulator and real-robot. All DRL agents are
trained from scratch without DR and then tuned by DR. This table is a part of the raw data of Table 3 before averaging.

                               Seed 0                           Seed 123                           Seed 200
          Num    Rob1      Rob5     Rob6      Sim     Rob1    Rob5 Rob6        Sim     Rob1      Rob5    Rob6     Sim
            1     -8787     -9647    -7396   -5257    -7579   -6335 -6700     -6461    -8000    -10161 -7614     -5413
            2    -11681     -6962 -10088     -6809    -6344   -6729 -7252     -5724    -8219     -9995 -8555     -6481
            3     -6013     -8187    -6318   -5442    -7376   -6124 -5388     -7291   -13052     -7443 -6707     -6812
            4    -10352     -6727    -4912   -5169    -5364   -8417 -7932     -6066   -12318     -8324 -7532     -7491
            5     -8789     -7936    -7370   -6081    -9498   -8711 -6013     -6474   -10980     -7155 -8574     -5620
            6    -10460    -11045    -7351   -5908    -8529   -7367 -5514     -5788   -11110     -6375 -7533     -8658
            7     -8279    -10296 -11356     -6426    -6393   -4906 -8937     -6458    -7776     -6660 -7679     -5728
            8    -10261     -9046    -6375   -6043    -4557   -7492 -7335     -5680    -8995     -9554 -6193     -6664
            9     -6371    -11219    -6704   -4671    -7729   -6269 -7673     -6544    -9650     -7126 -7821     -6263
           10    -10443    -11136 -11567     -6491    -8103   -9095 -9221     -7921   -10734     -9523 -5636     -6289
           11     -6236     -7585 -11795     -5751    -5496   -7470 -5685     -5299   -11455     -7360 -6246     -5608
           12     -8060     -6528 -10957     -3804    -6306   -9059 -8037     -5429    -8518     -5751 -9680     -4373
           13     -9808     -8811    -8557   -5418    -5114   -6558 -8175     -5993    -7719     -9358 -9330     -5051
           14    -10962    -11804 -11804     -7607    -6388   -6056 -6038     -6394   -10331     -7711 -8775     -5891
           15     -7681     -7249 -10592     -6500    -7062   -6800 -7225     -6278   -10197     -8043 -6610     -5868
          Avg     -8946     -8945    -8876   -5825    -6789   -7159 -7142     -6253    -9937     -8036 -7632     -6147




Table B4 The evaluated performance of agent with different KT policies. Where Pos is the deviation between actual and desired
position and Ori is the deviation of the orientation. The deviation is calculated by averaging the accumulated reward over 120,000
time-step.

               ACTOR-CRITIC              ACTOR                COLLECT                SCRATCH               TEACHER
       Num    Pos (m) Ori (rad)     Pos (m) Ori (rad)     Pos (m) Ori (rad)      Pos (m) Ori (rad)     Pos (m) Ori (rad)
         1    0.0201   1.3000       0.0698   1.7481       0.0248   1.5535        0.1654   2.5957       0.0215   2.0159
         2    0.0253   1.2571       0.0643   1.6544       0.0304   1.6287        0.1143   2.4134       0.0243   2.0639
         3    0.0185   1.4060       0.0579   1.7415       0.0301   1.4512        0.1512   2.3510       0.0178   2.1255
         4    0.0227   1.3226       0.0797   1.8560       0.0276   1.5742        0.1127   2.5419       0.0304   2.3097
         5    0.0221   1.2786       0.0651   1.8221       0.0341   1.4510        0.1208   2.2099       0.0242   2.2001
         6    0.0262   1.3984       0.0664   1.7988       0.0271   1.4512        0.1310   2.3118       0.0274   2.3187
         7    0.0243   1.2020       0.0691   1.6806       0.0349   1.5679        0.1049   2.4833       0.0204   2.3480
         8    0.0198   1.1144       0.0619   1.6527       0.0226   1.3843        0.1732   2.3918       0.0277   2.4137
         9    0.0308   1.3189       0.0639   1.6251       0.0297   1.4060        0.1406   2.5777       0.0326   2.2128
        10    0.0219   1.2269       0.0611   1.6519       0.0340   1.7080        0.1248   2.6528       0.0264   2.1901
        11    0.0225   1.7139       0.0601   1.6495       0.0339   1.4148        0.1215   2.5674       0.0226   2.1884
        12    0.0206   1.5068       0.0738   1.8200       0.0320   1.4506        0.1141   2.4648       0.0238   2.2346
        13    0.0216   1.3547       0.0694   1.7752       0.0331   1.3885        0.1280   2.4678       0.0200   1.9490
        14    0.0255   1.2386       0.0626   1.6965       0.0357   1.3612        0.1348   2.5125       0.0242   2.2067
        15    0.0227   1.1980       0.0666   1.7335       0.0287   1.4212        0.1604   2.6438       0.0179   2.2718
       Avg    0.0230   1.3225       0.0661   1.7270       0.0306   1.4808        0.1332   2.4790       0.0241   2.2033
