

===== PAGE 1 =====
January 2024
SERL: A Software Suite for Sample-Efficient
Robotic Reinforcement Learning
Jianlan Luo1*, Zheyuan Hu1*, Charles Xu1, You Liang Tan1, Jacob Berg2, Archit Sharma3, Stefan Schaal4, Chelsea Finn3,
Abhishek Gupta2 and Sergey Levine1
*Equal Contribution, 1Department of EECS, University of California, Berkeley, 2Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of
Washington, 3Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, 4Intrinsic Innovation LLC
Figure 1: Depiction of various tasks solved using SERL in the real world. These include PCB board insertion (left), cable routing
(middle), and object relocation (right). SERL provides an out-of-the-box package for real-world reinforcement learning, with support for
sample-efficient learning, learned rewards, and automation of resets.
In recent years, significant progress has been made in the field of robotic reinforcement learning (RL), enabling
methods that handle complex image observations, train in the real world, and incorporate auxiliary data, such
as demonstrations and prior experience. However, despite these advances, robotic RL remains hard to use. It is
acknowledged among practitioners that the particular implementation details of these algorithms are often just
as important (if not more so) for performance as the choice of algorithm. We posit that a significant challenge
to widespread adoption of robotic RL, as well as further development of robotic RL methods, is the comparative
inaccessibility of such methods. To address this challenge, we developed a carefully implemented library
containing a sample efficient off-policy deep RL method, together with methods for computing rewards and
resetting the environment, a high-quality controller for a widely-adopted robot, and a number of challenging
example tasks. We provide this library as a resource for the community, describe its design choices, and present
experimental results. Perhaps surprisingly, we find that our implementation can achieve very efficient learning,
acquiring policies for PCB board assembly, cable routing, and object relocation between 25 to 50 minutes of
training per policy on average, improving over state-of-the-art results reported for similar tasks in the literature.
These policies achieve perfect or near-perfect success rates, extreme robustness even under perturbations, and
exhibit emergent recovery and correction behaviors. We hope that these promising results and our high-quality
open-source implementation will provide a tool for the robotics community to facilitate further developments
in robotic RL. Our code, documentation, and videos can be found at https://serl-robot.github.io/
1. Introduction et al., 2017), and performing a wide range of other
skills. However, despite the significant progress on the
Considerable progress on robotic reinforcement learn-
underlying algorithms, RL remains challenging to use
ing (RL) over the recent years has produced impressive
for real-world robotic learning problems, and practical
results, with robots playing table tennis (Büchler et al.,
adoption has been more limited. We argue that part
2022), manipulating objects from raw images (Gupta
of the reason for this is that the implementation of
et al., 2021; Kalashnikov et al., 2021; Levine et al., 2016b),
RL algorithms, particularly for real-world robotic sys-
grasping diverse objects (Levine et al., 2018; Mahler
tems, presents a very large design space, and it is the
Corresponding author(s): Jianlan Luo and Zheyuan Hu, Berkeley AI Research Lab (BAIR), University of California, Berkeley: jianlanluo@eecs.berkeley.edu,
huzheyuan@berkeley.edu.
4202
beF
31
]OR.sc[
3v31061.1042:viXra

===== PAGE 2 =====
SERL: A Software Suite for Sample-Efficient Robotic Reinforcement Learning
challenge of navigating this design space, rather than on image observations. This result is significant be-
limitations of algorithms per se, that limit adoption. It cause RL, particularly with deep networks and image
is often acknowledged by practitioners in the field that inputs, is often considered to be highly inefficient. Our
details in the implementation of an RL algorithm might results challenge this assumption, suggesting careful
be as important (if not more important) as the particular implementations of existing techniques, combined with
choice of algorithm. Furthermore, real-world learning well-designed controllers and carefully selected compo-
presents additional challenges with reward specifica- nents for reward specification and resets, can provide
tion, implementation of environment resets, sample an overall system that is efficient enough for real-world
efficiency, compliant and safe control, and other diffi- use.
culties that put even more stress on this issue. Thus,
adoption and further research progress on real-world 2. Related Work
robotic RL may well be bottlenecked on implementation
While our framework combines existing RL methods
rather than novel algorithmic innovations.
into a complete robotic learning system, the particular
To address this challenge, our aim in this paper is to
combination of parts is carefully designed to provide
provide an open-source software framework, which we
for efficient and out-of-the-box reinforcement learning
call Sample-Efficient Robotic reinforcement Learning
directly in the real world and, as shown in our exper-
(SERL), that aims to facilitate wider adoption of RL in
iments, achieves excellent results on a wide range of
real-world robotics. SERL consists of the following
tasks. Here, we summarize both related prior methods
components: (1) a high-quality RL implementation that
and systems.
is geared towards real-world robotic learning and sup-
Algorithms for real-world RL: Real-world robotic
ports image observations and demonstrations; (2) im-
RL demands algorithms that are sample-efficient, can
plementations of several reward specification methods
utilize onboard perception, and support easily speci-
that are compatible with image observations, includ-
fied rewards and resets. A number of algorithms have
ing classifiers and adversarial training; (3) support for
shown the ability to learn very efficiently directly in
learning “forward-backward” controllers that can auto-
the real world (Riedmiller et al., 2009; Westenbroek
matically reset the task between trials (Eysenbach et al.,
et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2020; Zhan et al., 2021; Hou
2018); (4) a software package that can in principle con-
et al., 2020; Tebbe et al., 2021; Popov et al., 2017; Luo
nect the aforementioned RL component to any robotic
et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2024; Johannink
manipulator; and (5) an impedance controller design
et al., 2018; Schoettler et al., 2020), using variants of
principle that is particularly effective for dealing with
off-policy RL (Kostrikov et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2024;
contact-rich manipulation tasks. Our aim in this paper
Luo et al., 2023), model-based RL (Hester and Stone,
is not to propose novel algorithms or methodology, but
2013; Wu et al., 2022; Nagabandi et al., 2019; Rafailov
rather to offer a resource for the community to provide
et al., 2021; Luo et al., 2018), and on-policy RL (Zhu
roboticists with a well-designed foundation both for
et al., 2019). These advances have been paired with
future research on robotic RL, and other methods that
advances in inferring rewards from raw visual observa-
might employ robotic RL as a subroutine. However,
tion through success classifiers (Fu et al., 2018; Li et al.,
in the process of evaluating our framework, we also
2021), foundation-model-based rewards (Du et al., 2023;
make a scientifically interesting empirical observation:
Mahmoudieh et al., 2022; Fan et al., 2022), and rewards
when implemented properly in a carefully engineered
from videos (Ma et al., 2023b;a). Additionally, to enable
software package, current sample-efficient robotic RL
autonomous training, there have been a number of al-
methods can attain very high success rates with rela-
gorithmic advances in reset-free learning (Gupta et al.,
tively modest training times. The tasks in our evalu-
2021; Sharma et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2022;
ation are illustrated in Fig. 1: precise insertion tasks
Sharma et al., 2023) that enable autonomous training
involving dynamic contact, deformable object manip-
with minimal human interventions. While these algo-
ulation with complex dynamics, and object relocation
rithmic advances are important, the contribution we
where the robot must learn without manually designed
make in this work is to provide a framework and soft-
resets. For each of these tasks, SERL is able to learn
ware package to enable sample efficient reinforcement
effectively within 15 - 60 min of training per policy (in
learning in the real world with a ready-made choice
terms of total wall-clock time), achieving near-perfect
of methods that can work well for a variety of tasks.
success rates, despite learning policies that operate
In doing so, we hope to lower the barrier of entry for
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
SERL: A Software Suite for Sample-Efficient Robotic Reinforcement Learning
new researchers to build better algorithms and training dynamics, and 𝑟 ∶  ×  → ℝ is the reward function,
methodologies for robot learning in the real world. which encodes the task. An optimal policy 𝜋 is one
Software packages for RL: There are a number of that maximizes the cumulative expected value of the
packages (Seno and Imai, 2022; Nair and Pong; Hill et al., reward, i.e., 𝐸[∑∞ 𝑡=0 𝛾𝑡 𝑟(𝐬 𝑡 , 𝐚 𝑡 )], where the expectation
2018; Guadarrama et al., 2018) for RL, though to our is taken with respect to the initial state distribution,
knowledge, none aim to directly address real-world transition probabilities, and policy 𝜋.
robotic RL specifically. SERL builds on the recently While the specification of the RL task is concise and
proposed RLPD algorithm, which is an off-policy RL simple, turning real-world robotic learning problems
algorithm with a high update-to-data ratio. SERL is not into RL problems requires care. First, the sample effi-
a library of RL algorithms for training agents in simula- ciency of the algorithm for learning 𝜋 is paramount:
tion, although it could be adapted to be so. Rather, SERL when the learning must take place in the real world, ev-
offers a full stack pipeline for robot control, going from ery minute and hour of training comes at a cost. Sample
low-level controllers to the interface for asynchronous efficiency can be improved by using effective off-policy
and efficient training with an RL algorithm to additional RL algorithms (Konda and Tsitsiklis, 1999; Haarnoja
machinery for inferring rewards and training without et al., 2018; Fujimoto et al., 2018), but it can also be
resets. In doing so, SERL provides an off-the-shelf pack- accelerated by incorporating prior data and demonstra-
age to help non-experts start using RL to train their tions (Rajeswaran et al., 2018; Ball et al., 2023; Nair
physical robots in the real world, unlike prior libraries et al., 2020), which is important to achieve the fastest
that aim to provide implementations of many meth- training times.
ods – that is, SERL offers a full “vertical” integration of Additionally, many of the challenges with robotic
components, whereas prior libraries focus on the “hor- RL lie beyond just the core algorithm for optimizing 𝜋.
izontal.” SERL is also not an RL benchmark package For example, the reward function 𝑟 might depend on
such as (Yu et al., 2019; James et al., 2020; Mittal et al., image observations, and difficult for the user to specify
2023). SERL allows users to define their own tasks and manually. Additionally, for episodic tasks where the
success metrics directly in the real world, providing robot resets to an initial state 𝐬 0 ∼ 𝜌(𝐬 0 ) between trials,
the software infrastructure for actually controlling and actually resetting the robot (and its environment) into
training robotic manipulators in these tasks. one of these initial states is a mechanical operation that
Software for real-world RL: There have been several must somehow be automated.
previous packages that have proposed infrastructure Furthermore, the controller layer, which interfaces
for real world RL: for dexterous manipulation (Ahn the MDP actions 𝐚 (e.g., end-effector poses) to the actual
et al., 2019), tabletop furniture assembly (Heo et al., low-level robot controls, also requires great care, partic-
2023), legged locomotion (Kostrikov et al., 2023), and ularly for contact-rich tasks where the robot physically
peg insertion (Levine et al., 2016a). These packages are interacts with objects in the environment. Not only
effective in narrow situations, either using privileged does this controller need to be accurate, but it must
information or training setups such as explicit tracking also be safe enough that the RL algorithm can explore
(Levine et al., 2016a; Ahn et al., 2019) or pure proprio- with random actions during training.
ception (Kostrikov et al., 2023), or limited to imitation SERL will aim to provide ready-made solutions to
learning. In SERL, we show a full stack system that can each of these challenges, with a high-quality implemen-
be used for a wide variety of robotic manipulation tasks tation of a sample-efficient off-policy RL method that
without requiring privileging of the training setups as can incorporate prior data, several choices for reward
in prior work. function specification, a forward-backward algorithm
for learning resets, and a controller suitable for learning
3. Preliminaries and Problem Statement contact-rich tasks without damaging either the robot
or objects in the environment.
Robotic reinforcement learning tasks can be defined via
an MDP  = {, , 𝜌, , 𝑟, 𝛾}, where 𝐬 ∈  is the state
4. Sample Efficient Robotic Reinforce-
observation (e.g., an image in combination with the cur-
ment Learning in the Real-World
rent end-effector position), 𝐚 ∈  is the action (e.g., the
desired end-effector pose), 𝜌(𝐬 0 ) is a distribution over Our software package, which we call Sample-Efficient
initial states,  is the unknown and potentially stochas- Robotic reinforcement Learning (SERL), aims to make
tic transition probabilities that depend on the system robotic RL in the real world accessible by providing
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
SERL: A Software Suite for Sample-Efficient Robotic Reinforcement Learning
ready-made solutions to the problems detailed in the on-policy data, such that half of each batch comes from
previous section. This involves providing efficient prior data and half from the online replay buffer, and
vision-based reinforcement learning algorithms and (iii) layer-norm regularization during training. This
the infrastructure needed to support these learning al- method can train from scratch, or use prior data (e.g.,
gorithms for autonomous learning. We note that the demonstrations) to bootstrap learning. Each step of
purpose of such an endeavor is not to propose novel the algorithm updates the parameters of a parametric
algorithms or tools, but rather to develop a software Q-function 𝑄 𝜙 (𝐬, 𝐚) and actor 𝜋 𝜃 (𝐚|𝐬) according to the
package that anyone can use easily for robotic learning, gradient of their respective loss functions:
without complex setup procedures and painful integra-
tion across libraries.  𝑄 (𝜙) = 𝐸 𝐬,𝐚,𝐬′[(𝑄 𝜙 (𝐬, 𝐚)−(𝑟(𝐬, 𝐚)+𝛾𝐸 𝐚′∼𝜋
𝜃
[𝑄 𝜙̄ (𝐬′, 𝐚′)])) 2 ]
The core reinforcement learning algorithm is derived

𝜋
(𝜃) = −𝐸
𝐬
[𝐸
𝐚∼𝜋 (𝐚)
[𝑄
𝜙
(𝐬, 𝐚)] + 𝛼(𝜋
𝜃
(⋅|𝐬)] ,
from RLPD (Ball et al., 2023), which itself is a variant 𝜃
of soft actor-critic (Haarnoja et al., 2018): an off-policy
where 𝑄 𝜙̄ is a target network (Mnih et al., 2013), and
Q-function actor-critic method that can readily incor-
the actor loss uses entropy regularization with an adap-
porate prior data (either suboptimal data or demon-
tively adjusted weight 𝛼 (Haarnoja et al., 2018). Each
strations) into the replay buffer for efficient learning.
update step uses a sample-based approximation of each
The reward functions can be specified either with a bi-
expectation, with half of the samples drawn from the
nary classifier or VICE (Fu et al., 2018), which provides
prior data (e.g., demonstrations), and half drawn from
a method to update the classifier during RL training
the replay buffer (Mnih et al., 2013). For efficient learn-
with additional negatives from the policy. The reward
ing, multiple update steps are performed per time step
function can also be specified by hand in cases where
in the environment, which is referred to as the update-
the robot state is sufficient to evaluate success (e.g., as
to-date (UTD) ratio, and regularizing the critic with
in our PCB board assembly task). The resets can be
layer normalization allows for higher UTD ratios and
provided via a forward-backward architecture (Sharma
thus more efficient training (Ball et al., 2023).
et al., 2021), where the algorithm simultaneously trains
two policies: a forward policy that performs the task, 4.2. Reward Specification with Classifiers
and a backward policy that resets the environment back
Reward functions are difficult to specify by hand when
to the initial state. On the robot system side, we also
learning with image observations, as the robot typically
provide a universal adapter for interfacing our method
requires some sort of perception system just to deter-
to arbitrary robots, as well as an impedance controller
mine if the task was performed successfully. While
that is particularly well-suited for contact-rich manip-
some tasks, such as the PCB board assembly task in
ulation tasks.
Fig. 1, can accommodate hand-specified rewards based
on the location of the end effector (under the assump-
4.1. Core RL Algorithm: RLPD tion that the object is held rigidly in the gripper), most
There are several desiderata for reinforcement learning tasks require rewards to be deduced from images. In
algorithm to be deployed in this setting: (1) it must be this case, the reward function can be provided by a
efficient and able to make multiple gradient updates binary classifier that takes in the state observation 𝐬
per time step, (2) it must be able to incorporate prior and outputs the probability of a binary “event” 𝑒, corre-
data easily and then continue improving with further sponding to successful completion. The reward is then
experience, (3) it must be simple to debug and build on given by 𝑟(𝐬) = log 𝑝(𝑒|𝐬).
for new users. To this end, we build on the recently This classifier can be trained either using hand-
proposed RLPD (Ball et al., 2023) algorithm, which has specified positive and negative examples, or via an
shown compelling results on sample-efficient robotic adversarial method called VICE (Fu et al., 2018). The
learning. RLPD is an off-policy actor-critic reinforce- latter addresses a reward exploitation problem that can
ment learning algorithm that builds on the success arise when learning with classifier based rewards, and
of temporal difference algorithms such as soft-actor removes the need for negative examples in the clas-
critic (Haarnoja et al., 2018), but makes some key mod- sifier training set: when the RL algorithm optimizes
ifications to satisfy the desiderata above. RLPD makes the reward 𝑟(𝐬) = log 𝑝(𝑒|𝐬), it can potentially discover
three key changes: (i) high update-to-data ratio training “adversarial” states that fool the classifier 𝑝(𝑒|𝐬) to erro-
(UTD), (ii) symmetric sampling between prior data and neously output high probabilities. VICE addresses this
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
SERL: A Software Suite for Sample-Efficient Robotic Reinforcement Learning
issue by adding all states visited by the policy into the
training set for the classifier with negative labels, and
updating the classifier after each iteration. In this way,
the RL process is analogous to a generative adversar-
ial network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2014), with the
policy acting as the generator and the reward classi-
fier acting as the discriminator. Our framework thus
supports all three types of rewards.
4.3. Reset-Free Training with Forward-
Figure 2: Software architecture and real-world robot training
Backward Controllers
example code. SERL runs three parallel processes, consisting of the
When learning episodic tasks, the robot must reset actor, which chooses actions, and the learner node, which actually
the environment between task attempts. For example, runs the training code, and the robot environment, which executes
the actions from the actor and contributes data back to the learner.
when learning the object relocation task in Figure 1,
each time the robot successfully moves the object to the
target bin, it must then take it out and place it back into at a fixed rate, which is crucial for tasks that require
the initial bin. To remove the need for human effort immediate feedback and reactions, such as deformable
in “resets”, SERL supports “reset-free” training by us- objects and contact-rich manipulations, but also re-
ing forward and backward controllers (Han et al., 2015; duces the total wall-clock time spend training in the
Gupta et al., 2021). In this setup, two policies are trained real world.
simultaneously using two independent RL agents, each
4.5. Impedance Controller for Contact-Rich
with its own policy, Q-function, and reward function
Tasks
(specified via the methods in the previous section). The
forward agent learns to perform the task, and the back- Although our package should be compatible with any
ward agent learns to return to the initial state(s). While OEM robot controller, as described in Sec. 4, we found
more complex reset-free training procedures can also that the choice of controllers can heavily affect the final
be possible (Gupta et al., 2021), we find that this sim- performance. This is more pronounced for contact-
ple recipe is sufficient for learning object manipulation rich manipulation. For example, in the PCB insertion
tasks like the repositioning skill in Figure 1. task in Fig. 1, an overly stiff controller might bend the
fragile pins and make insertion difficult, while an overly
4.4. Software Components compliant controller might struggle to move the object
into position quickly.
Environment adapters: SERL aims to be easily usable
A typical setup for robotic RL employs a two-layered
for many robot environments. Although we provide a
control hierarchy, where an RL policy produces set-
set of Gym environment wrappers and robot environ-
point actions at a much lower frequency than the down-
ments for the Franka arm as starter guides, users can
stream real-time controller. The RL controller can set
also use their own existing environments or develop
targets for the low-level controller to cause physically
new environments as they see fit. Thus, the library
undesirable consequences. To illustrate this, let’s con-
does not impose additional constraints on the robot
sider the hierarchical controller structure presented in
environment as long as it is Gym-like (Brockman et al.,
Fig. 4, where a high-level RL controller 𝜋(𝐚|𝐬) sends
2016) as shown in Fig. 2. We welcome contributions
control targets at 10HZ for the low-level impedance
from the community to extend the support for readily
controller to track at 1K HZ, so one timestep from RL
deployable environment wrappers for other robots and
will block 100 timesteps of the low-level controller to
tasks.
execute. A typical impedance control objective for this
Actor and learner nodes: SERL includes options to
controller is
train and act in parallel to decouple inferring actions
and updating policies with a few lines of code as illus-
𝐹 = 𝑘 ⋅ 𝑒 + 𝑘 ⋅ 𝑒̇ + 𝐹 + 𝐹 ,
𝑝 𝑑 𝑓 𝑓 𝑐𝑜𝑟
trated in Fig. 2. We found this to be beneficial in sample-
efficient real-world learning problems with high UTD where 𝑒 = 𝑝 − 𝑝 𝑟𝑒𝑓 , 𝑝 is the measured pose, and 𝑝 𝑟𝑒𝑓 is
ratios. By separating actor and learner on two different the target pose computed by the upstream controller,
threads, SERL not only preserves the control frequency 𝐹 𝑓 𝑓 is the feed-forward force, 𝐹 𝑐𝑜𝑟 is the Coriolis force,
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
SERL: A Software Suite for Sample-Efficient Robotic Reinforcement Learning
stable training, because the episode would need enough
time steps to allow the arm to move over long distances
(e.g., approaching the insertion point). However, if we
directly clip at the real-time layer, this will largely mit-
igate the issue without the need to constrain the RL
policy to small actions. It will not block the free space
movement of the RL policy as long as 𝑀 ⋅ |Δ| ≥ |𝑎| 𝑚𝑎𝑥 ,
where 𝑀 is the number of control time-steps inside
a block, as in Fig. 4. This value is usually large (e.g.,
Figure 3: Visualization of controller logs from the robot when 𝑀 = 100). At the same time, we strictly enforce the
commanded with different movements, for the z-axis of the end-
reference constraint at the real-time level whenever
effector. The orange line is the commanded target (the output of
RL), red is the smoothed target sent to the real-time controller, blue in contact. One might also wonder if it’s possible to
is the clipped target, and green is the robot position after executing achieve the same result by using an external force/-
this controller. Left: The robot end-effector was commanded to
torque sensor. This may be undesirable for several
move into contact with a hard surface and continue the movement
reasons: (1) force/torque sensors can have significant
despite the contact. The reference limiting mechanism clipped the
target to avoid a hard collision. Right: The command is a fast noise, and obtaining the right hardware and calibration
free-space movement, which our reference limiting mechanism can be difficult; (2) even if we get such a threshold value,
does not block, allowing fast motion to the target. it’s nontrivial to design robot motions to accommodate
policy learning as well as obeying the force constraint.
In practice, we found that clipping the reference in this
way is simple but very effective, and is crucial to enable
RL-based contact-rich manipulation tasks. We tested
our controller on a Franka Panda robot and included
the Franka Panda implementation with our package.
Figure 4: A typical controller hierarchy for robotics RL. The
However, this principle can be easily implemented on
output from the RL policy is tracked within a block of time by the
downstream controller. any torque-controlled robot. To verify the actual perfor-
mance of the proposed controller, we report the actual
tracking performance of moving the robot in free space
this objective will then be converted into joint space
and in contact with a table surface as in Fig. 3, where
torques by multiplying Jacobian transpose and offset by
we can see the controller indeed clamps the reference
nullspace torques. It acts like a spring-damper system
whenever in contact, while permitting fast movement
around the equilibrium set by 𝑝 𝑟𝑒𝑓 with the stiffness
in free space.
coefficient being 𝑘 𝑝 and the damping coefficient being
𝑘 𝑑. As described above, this system will yield large
forces if 𝑝 𝑟𝑒𝑓 is far away from the current pose, which 4.6. Relative Observation and Action Frame
can lead to a hard collision or damage when the arm The choice of action space is particularly important
is in contact with something. Therefore it’s crucial to both for the ease of the RL training process and the
constrain the interaction force generated by it. How- ability of the learned policy to generalize to perturba-
ever, directly reducing gains will hurt the controller’s tions at test time. While SERL can operate on various
accuracy. Thus, we should bound 𝑒 so that |𝑒| ≤ Δ, action representations via a standard RL environment
and then the generated force from the spring-damper interface, we found that a convenient mechanism of
system will be bounded to 𝑘 𝑝 ⋅ |Δ| + 2𝑘 𝑑 ⋅ |Δ| ⋅ 𝑓 , 𝑓 is the representing observations and actions in a relative co-
control frequency. ordinate system.
One might wonder if we should directly clip the To develop an agent capable of adapting to a dynamic
action output by the RL policy. This might seem rea- target, we propose a training procedure that simulates a
sonable, but can be impractical in some scenarios: some moving target without the need for physical movement.
objects such as the PCB board may require a very small The target, for instance, the PCB insertion socket holes,
interaction force, implying a very small Δ, usually on is fixed relative to the robot base frame, and the reward
the order of micrometers; if the RL policy is only al- can be specified using any of the standard methods
lowed to move at increments of micrometers, it would provided in Sec. 4.2. At the beginning of each train-
result in an extremely long learning process or very un- ing episode, the pose of the robot’s end-effector was
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
SERL: A Software Suite for Sample-Efficient Robotic Reinforcement Learning
Figure 5: Illustration of the robot performing each task with our method: PCB Insertion (top left), Cable Routing (top right), Object
Relocation - Forward (bottom left), and Object Relocation - Backward (bottom right). The green box indicates a state where the robot
receives a high reward for completing the task.
Package Task Training time Success rate Demos Shaping? Vision? Open-sourced?
Guided Policy Search(Levine et al., 2016b) Peg insertion 3 hours 70% 0 Yes Yes Yes
DDPGfD (Vecerik et al., 2018) Peg/clip insertion 1.5-2.5 hours 97% / 77% 30 No Yes No
Visual Residual RL (Schoettler et al., 2020) Connector insertion Not mentioned 52% ∼ 100% 0 Yes Yes No
SHIELD (Luo et al., 2021) Connector insertion 1.5 hours 99.8% 25 No Yes No
InsertionNet (Spector and Castro, 2021) Connector insertion 40 mins 78.5% - 100% 0 Yes Yes No
SERL (Ours) PCB Insertion 20 mins 100% 20 No Yes Yes
Table 1: Comparison to results reported on similar tasks in prior work. The overall success rates for our method are generally higher,
and the training times are generally lower, as compared to prior results. Note also that the PCB board assembly task, shown in Figure 1,
has very tight tolerances, likely significantly tighter than the coarser peg and connector insertion tasks studied in the prior works.
randomized uniformly within a pre-defined area in the is tracked by the low-level controller. The evaluation
workspace. The robot’s proprioceptive information is tasks are illustrated in Fig. 5 and described below:
expressed with respect to frame of the end-effector’s ini- PCB insertion: Inserting connectors into a PCB board
tial pose; the action output from the policy (6D twist) is demands fine-grained, contact-rich manipulation with
relative to the current end-effector frame. This is equiv- sub-millimeter precision. This task is ideal for real-
alent to physically moving the target when viewed world training, as simulating and transferring such
relatively from the frame attached to the end-effector. contact-rich interactions can be challenging. At the
More details on are described in the appendix 7. As a beginning of each training and evaluation episode, the
result, the policy can succeed even if the object moves initial end effector pose is sampled uniformly from a
or, as in some of our experiments, is perturbed in the starting region, as described in Table 2.
middle of the episode. Cable routing: This task involves routing a de-
formable cable into a clip’s tight-fitting slot. This task
requires the robot to perceive the cable and carefully
5. Experiments
manipulate it so that it fits into the clip while holding it
Our experimental evaluation aims to study how effi- at another location. This is particularly difficult for any
ciently our system can learn a variety of robotic manip- method that relies on model-based control, or makes
ulation tasks, including contact-rich tasks, deformable rigid-object assumptions, since both visual perception
object manipulation, and free-floating object manipu- and handling of deformable objects is essential for ac-
lation. These experiments demonstrate the breadth of cess. Tasks of this sort often arise in manufacturing and
applicability and efficiency of SERL. We use a Franka maintenance scenarios. Similarly to the PCB task, the
Panda arm and two wrist cameras attached to the end- initial end effector pose is sampled uniformly within a
effector to get close-in views. Further details can be starting region, as described in Table 2.
found at https://serl-robot.github.io/. We use an Ima- Object relocation: This task requires moving a free-
geNet pre-trained ResNet-10 (He et al., 2015) as a vision floating object between bins, requiring grasping and
backbone for the policy network and connect it to a relocation. The intricacies of reward inference and
2-layer MLP. Observations include camera images and reset-free training become especially pronounced in the
robot proprioceptive information such as end-effector manipulation of such free-floating objects. We define
pose, twist, force, and torque. The policy outputs a 6D the forward task as picking up the object from the bin
end-effector delta pose from the current pose, which
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
SERL: A Software Suite for Sample-Efficient Robotic Reinforcement Learning
Task # of Demos Image Input Random Reset Reward Specification Bin Size Training Time
PCB Component Insertion 20 2 wrist camera True Ground Truth 10cm × 10cm 20 mins
Cable Routing 20 2 wrist camera True Binary Classifier 20cm × 20cm 31 mins
Object Relocation (Forward-Backward) 20 1 wrist, 1 side camera False Binary Classifier 20cm × 30cm 105 mins
Table 2: Task parameters: During demo collection for both BC and RL, as well as online training, each episode’s initial end-effector pose
resets uniformly at random within a fixed region for the PCB and Cable task, while the free-floating object relocation task resets above
the center of each bin.
Figure 6: Success rate comparisons: When evaluated for 100 trials Figure 7: Cycle time comparison: We recorded the average time
per task, learned RL policies outperformed BC policies by a large taken for the robot to succeed in each task. RL policies are at least
margin, by 1.7x for Object Relocation, by 5x for Cable Routing, 2x faster than BC policies trained with 100 high-quality human
and by 10x for PCB Insertion. teleoperated demonstrations for all three tasks.
on the right side and placing it on the left, while the time amounts to less than an hour per policy. For the
backward task moves the object back to the starting cable routing task and PCB insertion task, our policies
bin, undoing the forward task. outperform BC baselines by a large margin, despite
For each task, we initialize RL training from 20 tele- training with 5x fewer demonstrations than BC, sug-
operated demonstrations using a Space Mouse. To con- gesting that demos alone are insufficient. We report
firm that demonstrations alone are insufficient to solve the results in terms of success rate and cycle time in
the task, we include a behavioral cloning (BC) baseline Fig. 6 and Fig. 7. The learned RL policies not only out-
using 100 high-quality expert teleoperated demonstra- performed their BC counterparts by as much as 10x in
tions, roughly matching the total amount of data in the terms of success rate but also improved on the cycle
RL replay buffer when RL converges. Note that this is 5 time of the initial human demonstrations by up to 3x.
times more demonstrations than the amount provided
Comparison to prior systems: While it’s difficult
by our method. Both RL and BC demonstrations are
to directly compare our results to those of prior sys-
collected using the initial end effector randomization
tems due to numerous differences in the setup, lack
scheme described in Table 2. All training was done on
of consistently open-sourced code, and other discrep-
a single Nvidia RTX 4090 GPU.
ancies, we provide a summary of training times and
Results: We report the results in Table 2, and show success rates reported for tasks that are most similar
example executions in Fig. 5. We evaluated both BC to our PCB board insertion task in Table 2. We chose
and RL policies under the same conditions and proto- this task because similar insertion or assembly tasks
cols as detailed in Section 5. Our RL policies achieve have been studied in prior work, and such tasks often
perfect success rates on all three tasks over all 100 trials. present challenges with precision, compliant control,
For the PCB insertion and cable routing task, our RL and sample efficiency. Compared to these prior works,
policies converge in under 30 minutes of real-world our experiments do not use shaped rewards, which
training, which includes all computation, resets, and might require extensive engineering, though we do
intended stops. The free-floating object relocation task utilize a small amount of demonstration data (which
learns two policies (forward and backward), and total some prior works eschew). The results reported in
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
SERL: A Software Suite for Sample-Efficient Robotic Reinforcement Learning
that it can learn a range of diverse manipulation tasks
very efficiently, with under an hour of training per
policy when provided with a small number of demon-
strations. These results qualitatively compare well to
state-of-the-art results in RL for manipulation in the
literature, indicating that the particular choices in our
framework are well-suited for obtaining very good real-
Figure 8: Peg Insertion Task at University of Washington
world results even from image observations. Our frame-
work does have a number of limitations. First, we do
these prior works generally have either lower success
not aim to provide a comprehensive library with every
rates or longer training times, or both, suggesting our
possible RL method, and some tasks and settings might
implementation of sample-efficient RL matches or ex-
be outside of our framework (e.g., non-manipulation
ceeds the performance of state-of-the-art methods in
tasks). Second, the full range of reward specifications
the literature, at least on this type of task. The closest
and reset-free learning challenges still constitute an
performance to ours in the work of Spector et al. (Spec-
open problem in robotic RL research. Our classifier-
tor and Castro, 2021) includes a number of design deci-
based rewards and forward-backward controller might
sions and inductive biases that are specific to insertion,
not be appropriate in every setting. Further research on
whereas our method is generic and makes minimal task-
these topics is needed to make robotic RL more broadly
specific assumptions. Although the components of our
applicable. However, we hope that our software pack-
system are all based on (recent) prior work, the state-
age will provide a reasonable “default” starting point
of-the-art performance of this combination illustrates
for both researchers and practitioners wanting to ex-
our main thesis: the details of how deep RL methods
periment with real-world RL methods.
are implemented can make a big difference.
Reproducibility: A core mission of SERL is to lower Acknowledgments
the setup barriers and encourage reproducible robotic
This research was partially supported by Intrinsic In-
RL on different robot systems. To this end, we demon-
novation LLC, the National Science Foundation under
strate the successful integration of SERL software suite
IIS-2150826, and ARO W911NF-21-1-0097. We would
on a robot arm operated at a different institution.
like to thank Rehaan Ahmad and Siri Gadipudi for par-
Researchers at the University of Washington set up
ticipating in the discussion of this project.
a Peg Insertion task using 3D printed parts from the
Functional Manipulation Benchmark (Luo et al., 2024)
7. Appendix
and used SERL to solve this challenging task. The over-
all preparation time including setting up the relevant 7.1. Details on Relative Observation and Ac-
hardware and software is less than 3 hours. The policy
tion Frame
converged in 19 minutes and achieved a 100/100 success
Let the robot’s base frame be {𝑠}; for the 𝑖-th episode
rate with 20 initial human demonstrations, successfully
of rolling out the policy, we denote
{𝑏(𝑖)}
as the end-
𝑡
reproducing our results.
effector frame expressed w.r.t. {𝑠} at a particular time
step 𝑡; where 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑀, 0 ≤ 𝑡 ≤ 𝑁 . For each episode,
6. Discussion {𝑏(𝑖)} is sampled from a uniform distribution specifying
0
the area of randomization. We want to express such
We described a system and software package for robotic
proprioceptive information with respect to
{𝑏(𝑖)}.
Thus,
reinforcement learning that is aimed at making real- 0
the policy will be applicable to a new location provided
world RL more accessible both to researchers and prac-
that the relative spatial distance between the robot’s
titioners. Our software package provides a carefully de-
end-effector and the target remains consistent. This
signed combination of ingredients for sample-efficient
approach prevents overfitting to specific global loca-
RL, automating reward design, automating environ-
tions within the reference frame {𝑠}. We achieve this by
ment resets with forward-backward controllers, and a
applying the following homogeneous transformation:
controller framework that is particularly well-suited for
contact-rich manipulation tasks. Furthermore, our ex-
𝑇 = 𝑇 −1 ⋅ 𝑇
perimental evaluation of our framework demonstrates 𝑏 0 (𝑖)𝑏 𝑡 (𝑖) 𝑏 0 (𝑖) 𝑏 𝑡 (𝑖)
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
SERL: A Software Suite for Sample-Efficient Robotic Reinforcement Learning
where we use 𝑇 𝑎𝑏 to denote the homogeneous trans- muscular robots. IEEE Trans. Robotics, 38(6):3850–
formation matrix between frame {𝑎} and {𝑏}. We feed 3860, 2022. doi: 10.1109/TRO.2022.3176207. URL
the position and rotation information extracted from https://doi.org/10.1109/TRO.2022.3176207.
𝑇 𝑏(𝑖)𝑏(𝑖) to the policy. Here we use 𝑇 𝑎𝑏 to denote the ho-
0 𝑡 Yuqing Du, Ksenia Konyushkova, Misha Denil, Akhil
mogeneous transformation matrix between frame {𝑎}
Raju, Jessica Landon, Felix Hill, Nando de Freitas,
and {𝑏}, defined as:
and Serkan Cabi. Vision-language models as success
𝑅 𝑝 detectors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.07280, 2023.
𝑇 = 𝑎𝑏 𝑎𝑏 .
𝑎𝑏 [0 1 ]
1×3 Benjamin Eysenbach, Shixiang Gu, Julian Ibarz, and
The policy generates a six degrees of freedom (6 DoF) Sergey Levine. Leave no trace: Learning to reset
twist action, which is expressed in the reference frame for safe and autonomous reinforcement learning. In
from which it currently receives observations, i.e., {𝑏(𝑖)}. 6th International Conference on Learning Representa-
𝑡
Mathematically, the 6 DoF twist action (𝑖) expressed in tions, ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 -
𝑡
frame {𝑏(𝑖)} at timestep 𝑡. To interface with the robot’s May 3, 2018, Conference Track Proceedings. OpenRe-
𝑡
control software, which expects actions
(𝑖)′
expressed
view.net, 2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
𝑡
in the base frame {𝑠}, we apply the Adjoint mapping: S1vuO-bCW.
(𝑖)′ = [Ad (𝑖)] −1 (𝑖) Linxi Fan, Guanzhi Wang, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Man-
𝑡 𝑡 𝑡 dlekar, Yuncong Yang, Haoyi Zhu, Andrew Tang,
De-An Huang, Yuke Zhu, and Anima Anandkumar.
where [Ad (𝑖)] is a function of the homogeneous trans-
𝑡 Minedojo: Building open-ended embodied agents
formation 𝑇 defined as:
𝑏
0
(𝑖) with internet-scale knowledge. In NeurIPS, 2022.
URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/
𝑅 0
[Ad (𝑖)] = 𝑏 𝑡 (𝑖) 3×3 . 74a67268c5cc5910f64938cac4526a90-Abstract-Datasets_
𝑡 [[𝑝 𝑏(𝑖) ] × 𝑅 𝑏(𝑖) 𝑅 𝑏(𝑡) ] and_Benchmarks.html.
𝑡 𝑡 𝑡
Justin Fu, Avi Singh, Dibya Ghosh, Larry Yang, and
Sergey Levine. Variational inverse control with
References
events: A general framework for data-driven reward
Michael Ahn, Henry Zhu, Kristian Hartikainen, Hugo definition. Advances in neural information processing
Ponte, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine, and Vikash systems, 31, 2018.
Kumar. ROBEL: robotics benchmarks for learn-
ing with low-cost robots. In Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Scott Fujimoto, Herke van Hoof, and David Meger.
Danica Kragic, and Komei Sugiura, editors, 3rd An- Addressing function approximation error in actor-
nual Conference on Robot Learning, CoRL 2019, Os- critic methods. In Jennifer G. Dy and Andreas
aka, Japan, October 30 - November 1, 2019, Proceed- Krause, editors, Proceedings of the 35th International
ings, volume 100 of Proceedings of Machine Learn- Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018, Stock-
ing Research, pages 1300–1313. PMLR, 2019. URL holmsmässan, Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018,
http://proceedings.mlr.press/v100/ahn20a.html. volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
search, pages 1582–1591. PMLR, 2018. URL http:
Philip J Ball, Laura Smith, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey //proceedings.mlr.press/v80/fujimoto18a.html.
Levine. Efficient online reinforcement learning with
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza,
offline data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.02948, 2023.
Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversar-
Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and Wo- ial nets. Advances in neural information processing
jciech Zaremba. Openai gym. arXiv preprint systems, 27, 2014.
arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.
Sergio Guadarrama, Anoop Korattikara, Oscar Ramirez,
Dieter Büchler, Simon Guist, Roberto Calandra, Vin- Pablo Castro, Ethan Holly, Sam Fishman, Ke Wang,
cent Berenz, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Jan Peters. Ekaterina Gonina, Neal Wu, Efi Kokiopoulou, Lu-
Learning to play table tennis from scratch using ciano Sbaiz, Jamie Smith, Gábor Bartók, Jesse
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
SERL: A Software Suite for Sample-Efficient Robotic Reinforcement Learning
Berent, Chris Harris, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Eu- Zhimin Hou, Jiajun Fei, Yuelin Deng, and Jing Xu.
gene Brevdo. TF-Agents: A library for reinforcement Data-efficient hierarchical reinforcement learning
learning in tensorflow. https://github.com/tensorflow/ for robotic assembly control applications. IEEE Trans-
agents, 2018. URL https://github.com/tensorflow/agents. actions on Industrial Electronics, 68(11):11565–11575,
[Online; accessed 25-June-2019]. 2020.
Abhishek Gupta, Justin Yu, Tony Z. Zhao, Vikash Zheyuan Hu, Aaron Rovinsky, Jianlan Luo, Vikash Ku-
Kumar, Aaron Rovinsky, Kelvin Xu, Thomas De- mar, Abhishek Gupta, and Sergey Levine. REBOOT:
vlin, and Sergey Levine. Reset-free reinforcement reuse data for bootstrapping efficient real-world dex-
learning via multi-task learning: Learning dexterous terous manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.03322,
manipulation behaviors without human interven- 2024.
tion. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics
Stephen James, Zicong Ma, David Rovick Arrojo, and
and Automation, ICRA 2021, Xi’an, China, May 30
Andrew J. Davison. Rlbench: The robot learning
- June 5, 2021, pages 6664–6671. IEEE, 2021. doi:
benchmark & learning environment. IEEE Robotics
10.1109/ICRA48506.2021.9561384. URL https://doi.
Autom. Lett., 5(2):3019–3026, 2020. doi: 10.1109/LRA.
org/10.1109/ICRA48506.2021.9561384.
2020.2974707. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2020.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and 2974707.
Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maxi-
Tobias Johannink, Shikhar Bahl, Ashvin Nair, Jianlan
mum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a
Luo, Avinash Kumar, Matthias Loskyll, Juan Aparicio
stochastic actor. In International conference on ma-
Ojea, Eugen Solowjow, and Sergey Levine. Resid-
chine learning, pages 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018.
ual reinforcement learning for robot control. CoRR,
Weiqiao Han, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Learn- abs/1812.03201, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1812.
ing compound multi-step controllers under un- 03201.
known dynamics. In 2015 IEEE/RSJ International
Dmitry Kalashnikov, Jacob Varley, Yevgen Chebotar,
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
Benjamin Swanson, Rico Jonschkowski, Chelsea
pages 6435–6442. IEEE, 2015.
Finn, Sergey Levine, and Karol Hausman. Mt-opt:
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Continuous multi-task robotic reinforcement learn-
Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition, ing at scale. CoRR, abs/2104.08212, 2021. URL
2015. https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.08212.
Minho Heo, Youngwoon Lee, Doohyun Lee, and Vijay R. Konda and John N. Tsitsiklis. Actor-critic al-
Joseph J. Lim. Furniturebench: Reproducible real- gorithms. In Sara A. Solla, Todd K. Leen, and Klaus-
world benchmark for long-horizon complex manip- Robert Müller, editors, Advances in Neural Informa-
ulation. In Kostas E. Bekris, Kris Hauser, Sylvia L. tion Processing Systems 12, [NIPS Conference, Den-
Herbert, and Jingjin Yu, editors, Robotics: Science and ver, Colorado, USA, November 29 - December 4, 1999],
Systems XIX, Daegu, Republic of Korea, July 10-14, pages 1008–1014. The MIT Press, 1999. URL http:
2023, 2023. doi: 10.15607/RSS.2023.XIX.041. URL //papers.nips.cc/paper/1786-actor-critic-algorithms.
https://doi.org/10.15607/RSS.2023.XIX.041.
Ilya Kostrikov, Laura M. Smith, and Sergey Levine.
Todd Hester and Peter Stone. Texplore: real-time Demonstrating A walk in the park: Learning to walk
sample-efficient reinforcement learning for robots. in 20 minutes with model-free reinforcement learn-
Machine learning, 90:385–429, 2013. ing. In Kostas E. Bekris, Kris Hauser, Sylvia L. Her-
bert, and Jingjin Yu, editors, Robotics: Science and
Ashley Hill, Antonin Raffin, Maximilian Ernestus,
Systems XIX, Daegu, Republic of Korea, July 10-14,
Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Rene Traore, Pra-
2023, 2023. doi: 10.15607/RSS.2023.XIX.056. URL
fulla Dhariwal, Christopher Hesse, Oleg Klimov, Alex
https://doi.org/10.15607/RSS.2023.XIX.056.
Nichol, Matthias Plappert, Alec Radford, John Schul-
man, Szymon Sidor, and Yuhuai Wu. Stable baselines. Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Darrell, and Pieter
https://github.com/hill-a/stable-baselines, 2018. Abbeel. End-to-end training of deep visuomotor
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
SERL: A Software Suite for Sample-Efficient Robotic Reinforcement Learning
policies. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 17:39:1–39:40, 2016a. Jianlan Luo, Charles Xu, Fangchen Liu, Liam Tan,
URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v17/15-522.html. Zipeng Lin, Jeffrey Wu, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey
Levine. Fmb: a functional manipulation benchmark
Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Darrell, and Pieter
for generalizable robotic learning. arXiv preprint
Abbeel. End-to-end training of deep visuomotor
arXiv:2401.08553, 2024.
policies. The Journal of Machine Learning Research,
17(1):1334–1373, 2016b. Yecheng Jason Ma, Vikash Kumar, Amy Zhang, Os-
bert Bastani, and Dinesh Jayaraman. LIV: language-
Sergey Levine, Peter Pastor, Alex Krizhevsky, Julian
image representations and rewards for robotic
Ibarz, and Deirdre Quillen. Learning hand-eye coor-
control. In Andreas Krause, Emma Brunskill,
dination for robotic grasping with deep learning and
Kyunghyun Cho, Barbara Engelhardt, Sivan Sabato,
large-scale data collection. Int. J. Robotics Res., 37
and Jonathan Scarlett, editors, International Confer-
(4-5):421–436, 2018. doi: 10.1177/0278364917710318.
ence on Machine Learning, ICML 2023, 23-29 July 2023,
URL https://doi.org/10.1177/0278364917710318.
Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, volume 202 of Proceedings
Kevin Li, Abhishek Gupta, Ashwin Reddy, Vitchyr H. of Machine Learning Research, pages 23301–23320.
Pong, Aurick Zhou, Justin Yu, and Sergey Levine. PMLR, 2023a. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/
MURAL: meta-learning uncertainty-aware rewards ma23b.html.
for outcome-driven reinforcement learning. In Ma-
Yecheng Jason Ma, Shagun Sodhani, Dinesh Jayaraman,
rina Meila and Tong Zhang, editors, Proceedings of
Osbert Bastani, Vikash Kumar, and Amy Zhang. VIP:
the 38th International Conference on Machine Learn-
towards universal visual reward and representation
ing, ICML 2021, 18-24 July 2021, Virtual Event, vol-
via value-implicit pre-training. In The Eleventh In-
ume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
ternational Conference on Learning Representations,
search, pages 6346–6356. PMLR, 2021. URL http:
ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenRe-
//proceedings.mlr.press/v139/li21g.html.
view.net, 2023b. URL https://openreview.net/pdf?id=
Jianlan Luo, Eugen Solowjow, Chengtao Wen, YJ7o2wetJ2.
Juan Aparicio Ojea, and Alice M Agogino. Deep
Jeffrey Mahler, Jacky Liang, Sherdil Niyaz, Michael
reinforcement learning for robotic assembly of
Laskey, Richard Doan, Xinyu Liu, Juan Aparicio
mixed deformable and rigid objects. In 2018 IEEE/RSJ
Ojea, and Ken Goldberg. Dex-net 2.0: Deep learning
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
to plan robust grasps with synthetic point clouds
Systems (IROS), pages 2062–2069. IEEE, 2018.
and analytic grasp metrics. In Nancy M. Amato,
Jianlan Luo, Eugen Solowjow, Chengtao Wen, Siddhartha S. Srinivasa, Nora Ayanian, and Scott
Juan Aparicio Ojea, Alice M Agogino, Aviv Tamar, Kuindersma, editors, Robotics: Science and Systems
and Pieter Abbeel. Reinforcement learning on XIII, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cam-
variable impedance controller for high-precision bridge, Massachusetts, USA, July 12-16, 2017, 2017.
robotic assembly. In 2019 International Conference on doi: 10.15607/RSS.2017.XIII.058. URL http://www.
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 3080–3087. roboticsproceedings.org/rss13/p58.html.
IEEE, 2019.
Parsa Mahmoudieh, Deepak Pathak, and Trevor Dar-
Jianlan Luo, Oleg Sushkov, Rugile Pevceviciute, Wen- rell. Zero-shot reward specification via grounded
zhao Lian, Chang Su, Mel Vecerik, Ning Ye, Stefan natural language. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie
Schaal, and Jonathan Scholz. Robust Multi-Modal Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvári, Gang Niu, and
Policies for Industrial Assembly via Reinforcement Sivan Sabato, editors, International Conference on
Learning and Demonstrations: A Large-Scale Study. Machine Learning, ICML 2022, 17-23 July 2022, Bal-
In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems, Vir- timore, Maryland, USA, volume 162 of Proceedings
tual, July 2021. doi: 10.15607/RSS.2021.XVII.088. of Machine Learning Research, pages 14743–14752.
PMLR, 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/
Jianlan Luo, Perry Dong, Yuexiang Zhai, Yi Ma, and
mahmoudieh22a.html.
Sergey Levine. Rlif: Interactive imitation learn-
ing as reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint Mayank Mittal, Calvin Yu, Qinxi Yu, Jingzhou Liu,
arXiv:2311.12996, 2023. Nikita Rudin, David Hoeller, Jia Lin Yuan, Poo-
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
SERL: A Software Suite for Sample-Efficient Robotic Reinforcement Learning
ria Poorsarvi Tehrani, Ritvik Singh, Yunrong Guo, and Systems, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, June 2018.
Hammad Mazhar, Ajay Mandlekar, Buck Babich, doi: 10.15607/RSS.2018.XIV.049.
Gavriel State, Marco Hutter, and Animesh Garg. Or-
Martin Riedmiller, Thomas Gabel, Roland Hafner, and
bit: A unified simulation framework for interactive
Sascha Lange. Reinforcement learning for robot soc-
robot learning environments, 2023.
cer. Autonomous Robots, 27:55–73, 2009.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver,
Gerrit Schoettler, Ashvin Nair, Jianlan Luo, Shikhar
Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wierstra,
Bahl, Juan Aparicio Ojea, Eugen Solowjow, and
and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep rein-
Sergey Levine. Deep reinforcement learning for in-
forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602,
dustrial insertion tasks with visual inputs and natural
2013.
rewards. In 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
Anusha Nagabandi, Kurt Konolige, Sergey Levine, and on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pages 5548–
Vikash Kumar. Deep dynamics models for learn- 5555, 2020. doi: 10.1109/IROS45743.2020.9341714.
ing dexterous manipulation. In Leslie Pack Kael-
Takuma Seno and Michita Imai. d3rlpy: An offline deep
bling, Danica Kragic, and Komei Sugiura, editors,
reinforcement learning library. Journal of Machine
3rd Annual Conference on Robot Learning, CoRL 2019,
Learning Research, 23(315):1–20, 2022. URL http://
Osaka, Japan, October 30 - November 1, 2019, Proceed-
jmlr.org/papers/v23/22-0017.html.
ings, volume 100 of Proceedings of Machine Learn-
ing Research, pages 1101–1112. PMLR, 2019. URL
Archit Sharma, Kelvin Xu, Nikhil Sardana, Ab-
http://proceedings.mlr.press/v100/nagabandi20a.html.
hishek Gupta, Karol Hausman, Sergey Levine, and
Chelsea Finn. Autonomous reinforcement learn-
Ashvin Nair and Vitchyr Pong. rlkit. Github. URL
ing: Benchmarking and formalism. arXiv preprint
https://github.com/rail-berkeley/rlkit.
arXiv:2112.09605, 2021.
Ashvin Nair, Murtaza Dalal, Abhishek Gupta, and
Archit Sharma, Ahmed M. Ahmed, Rehaan Ahmad,
Sergey Levine. Accelerating online reinforcement
and Chelsea Finn. Self-improving robots: End-to-
learning with offline datasets, 2020.
end autonomous visuomotor reinforcement learning.
Ivaylo Popov, Nicolas Heess, Timothy Lillicrap, Roland CoRR, abs/2303.01488, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2303.
Hafner, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Matej Vecerik, Thomas 01488. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.01488.
Lampe, Yuval Tassa, Tom Erez, and Martin Riedmiller.
Oren Spector and Dotan Di Castro. Insertionnet – a
Data-efficient deep reinforcement learning for dex-
scalable solution for insertion, 2021.
terous manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.03073,
2017.
Jonas Tebbe, Lukas Krauch, Yapeng Gao, and Andreas
Zell. Sample-efficient reinforcement learning in
Rafael Rafailov, Tianhe Yu, Aravind Rajeswaran, and
robotic table tennis. In 2021 IEEE international confer-
Chelsea Finn. Offline reinforcement learning from
ence on robotics and automation (ICRA), pages 4171–
images with latent space models. In Ali Jadbabaie,
4178. IEEE, 2021.
John Lygeros, George J. Pappas, Pablo A. Parrilo,
Benjamin Recht, Claire J. Tomlin, and Melanie N.
Mel Vecerik, Oleg Sushkov, David Barker, Thomas
Zeilinger, editors, Proceedings of the 3rd Annual
Rothörl, Todd Hester, and Jon Scholz. A practical
Conference on Learning for Dynamics and Control,
approach to insertion with variable socket position
L4DC 2021, 7-8 June 2021, Virtual Event, Switzer-
using deep reinforcement learning, 2018.
land, volume 144 of Proceedings of Machine Learn-
ing Research, pages 1154–1168. PMLR, 2021. URL Tyler Westenbroek, Fernando Castaneda, Ayush
http://proceedings.mlr.press/v144/rafailov21a.html. Agrawal, Shankar Sastry, and Koushil Sreenath. Lya-
punov design for robust and efficient robotic rein-
Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Abhishek Gupta,
forcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.06721,
Giulia Vezzani, John Schulman, Emanuel Todorov,
2022.
and Sergey Levine. Learning complex dexterous
manipulation with deep reinforcement learning and Philipp Wu, Alejandro Escontrela, Danijar Hafner,
demonstrations. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science Pieter Abbeel, and Ken Goldberg. Daydreamer:
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
SERL: A Software Suite for Sample-Efficient Robotic Reinforcement Learning
World models for physical robot learning. In Karen Henry Zhu, Justin Yu, Abhishek Gupta, Dhruv Shah,
Liu, Dana Kulic, and Jeffrey Ichnowski, editors, Con- Kristian Hartikainen, Avi Singh, Vikash Kumar, and
ference on Robot Learning, CoRL 2022, 14-18 December Sergey Levine. The ingredients of real world robotic
2022, Auckland, New Zealand, volume 205 of Proceed- reinforcement learning. In 8th International Confer-
ings of Machine Learning Research, pages 2226–2240. ence on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis
PMLR, 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v205/ Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net,
wu23c.html. 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=rJe2syrtvS.
Annie Xie, Fahim Tajwar, Archit Sharma, and
Chelsea Finn. When to ask for help: Proac-
tive interventions in autonomous reinforce-
ment learning. In NeurIPS, 2022. URL
http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/
6bf82cc56a5fa0287c438baa8be65a70-Abstract-Conference.
html.
Yuxiang Yang, Ken Caluwaerts, Atil Iscen, Tingnan
Zhang, Jie Tan, and Vikas Sindhwani. Data efficient
reinforcement learning for legged robots. In Confer-
ence on Robot Learning, pages 1–10. PMLR, 2020.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian,
Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine.
Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-
task and meta reinforcement learning. In Leslie Pack
Kaelbling, Danica Kragic, and Komei Sugiura, edi-
tors, 3rd Annual Conference on Robot Learning, CoRL
2019, Osaka, Japan, October 30 - November 1, 2019,
Proceedings, volume 100 of Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pages 1094–1100. PMLR, 2019.
URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v100/yu20a.html.
Albert Zhan, Ruihan Zhao, Lerrel Pinto, Pieter Abbeel,
and Michael Laskin. A framework for efficient
robotic manipulation. In Deep RL Workshop NeurIPS
2021, 2021.
Tony Z. Zhao, Jianlan Luo, Oleg Sushkov, Rugile Pevce-
viciute, Nicolas Heess, Jon Scholz, Stefan Schaal, and
Sergey Levine. Offline meta-reinforcement learning
for industrial insertion. In 2022 International Confer-
ence on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 6386–
6393, 2022. doi: 10.1109/ICRA46639.2022.9812312.
Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Aravind Rajeswaran,
Sergey Levine, and Vikash Kumar. Dexterous ma-
nipulation with deep reinforcement learning: Effi-
cient, general, and low-cost. In International Confer-
ence on Robotics and Automation, ICRA 2019, Mon-
treal, QC, Canada, May 20-24, 2019, pages 3651–3657.
IEEE, 2019. doi: 10.1109/ICRA.2019.8794102. URL
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2019.8794102.
14