                                                                 Deep Dynamics Models
                                                           for Learning Dexterous Manipulation
                                                    Anusha Nagabandi, Kurt Konoglie, Sergey Levine, Vikash Kumar
                                                                           Google Brain
                                                  Abstract: Dexterous multi-fingered hands can provide robots with the ability to
                                                  flexibly perform a wide range of manipulation skills. However, many of the more




arXiv:1909.11652v1 [cs.RO] 25 Sep 2019
                                                  complex behaviors are also notoriously difficult to control: Performing in-hand
                                                  object manipulation, executing finger gaits to move objects, and exhibiting pre-
                                                  cise fine motor skills such as writing, all require finely balancing contact forces,
                                                  breaking and reestablishing contacts repeatedly, and maintaining control of un-
                                                  actuated objects. Learning-based techniques provide the appealing possibility of
                                                  acquiring these skills directly from data, but current learning approaches either
                                                  require large amounts of data and produce task-specific policies, or they have not
                                                  yet been shown to scale up to more complex and realistic tasks requiring fine mo-
                                                  tor skills. In this work, we demonstrate that our method of online planning with
                                                  deep dynamics models (PDDM) addresses both of these limitations; we show that
                                                  improvements in learned dynamics models, together with improvements in on-
                                                  line model-predictive control, can indeed enable efficient and effective learning
                                                  of flexible contact-rich dexterous manipulation skills – and that too, on a 24-DoF
                                                  anthropomorphic hand in the real world, using just 4 hours of purely real-world
                                                  data to learn to simultaneously coordinate multiple free-floating objects. Videos
                                                  can be found at https://sites.google.com/view/pddm/
                                                  Keywords: Manipulation, Model-based learning, Robots


                                         1   Introduction
                                         Dexterous manipulation with multi-fingered hands represents a grand challenge in robotics: the ver-
                                         satility of the human hand is as yet unrivaled by the capabilities of robotic systems, and bridging this
                                         gap will enable more general and capable robots. Although some real-world tasks can be accom-
                                         plished with simple parallel jaw grippers, there are countless tasks in which dexterity in the form
                                         of redundant degrees of freedom is critical. In fact, dexterous manipulation is defined [1] as being
                                         object-centric, with the goal of controlling object movement through precise control of forces and
                                         motions – something that is not possible without the ability to simultaneously impact the object from
                                         multiple directions. Through added controllability and stability, multi-fingered hands enable useful
                                         fine motor skills that are necessary for deliberate interaction with objects. For example, using only
                                         two fingers to attempt common tasks such as opening the lid of a jar, hitting a nail with a hammer, or
                                         writing on paper with a pencil would quickly encounter the challenges of slippage, complex contact
                                         forces, and underactuation. Success in such settings requires a sufficiently dexterous hand, as well
                                         as an intelligent policy that can endow such a hand with the appropriate control strategy.




                                         Figure 1: PDDM can efficiently and effectively learn complex dexterous manipulation skills in both simulation
                                         and the real world. Here, the learned model uses less than 4 hours of experience to enable the Shadow Hand to
                                         rotate two free-floating Baoding balls in the palm without any prior knowledge of system dynamics.


                                                                                              1
The principle challenges in dexterous manipulation stem from the need to coordinate numerous
joints and impart complex forces onto the object of interest. The need to repeatedly establish and
break contacts presents an especially difficult problem for analytic approaches, which require ac-
curate models of the physics of the system. Learning offers a promising data-driven alternative.
Model-free reinforcement learning (RL) methods can learn policies that achieve good performance
on complex tasks [2, 3, 4]; however, we will show that these state-of-the-art algorithms struggle
when a high degree of flexibility is required, such as moving a pencil to follow arbitrary user-
specified strokes. Here, complex contact dynamics and high chances of task failure make the overall
skill much more difficult. Model-free methods also require large amounts of data, making them
difficult to use in the real world. Model-based RL methods, on the other hand, can be much more
efficient, but have not yet been scaled up to such complex tasks. In this work, we aim to push the
boundary on this task complexity; consider, for instance, the task of rotating two Baoding balls
around the palm of your hand (Figure 1). We will discuss how model-based RL methods can solve
such tasks, both in simulation and on a real-world robot.
Algorithmically, we present a technique that combines
elements of recently-developed uncertainty-aware neu-
ral network models with state-of-the-art gradient-free
trajectory optimization. While the individual compo-
nents of our method are based heavily on prior work,
we show that their combination is both novel and crit-
ical. Our approach, based on deep model-based RL,
challenges the general machine learning community’s
notion that models are difficult to learn and do not yet
deliver control results that are as impressive as model-
free methods. In this work, we push forward the em-
pirical results of model-based RL, in both simulation
and the real world, on a suite of dexterous manipula-
tion tasks starting with a 9-DoF three-fingered hand [5]
rotating a valve, and scaling up to a 24-DoF anthropo-
morphic hand executing handwriting and manipulating
free-floating objects (Figure 2). These realistic tasks re-
quire not only learning about interactions between the
robot and objects in the world, but also effective plan-
ning to find precise and coordinated maneuvers while
avoiding task failure (e.g., dropping objects). To the
best of our knowledge, our paper demonstrates for the
first time that deep neural network models can indeed
enable sample-efficient and autonomous discovery of           Figure 2: Task suite of simulated and real-
fine motor skills with high-dimensional manipulators,         world dexterous manipulation: valve ro-
including a real-world dexterous hand trained entirely        tation, in-hand reorientation, handwriting,
using just 4 hours of real-world data.                        and manipulating Baoding balls.


2   Related Work
In recent years, the mechanical and hardware development of multi-fingered robotic hands has sig-
nificantly advanced [6, 7], but our manipulation capabilities haven’t scaled similarly. Prior work in
this area has explored a wide spectrum of manipulation strategies: [8]’s optimizer used geometric
meshes of the object to plan finger-gaiting maneuvers, [9]’s multi-phase planner used the help of
offline simulations and a reduced basis of hand poses to accelerate the parameter search for in-hand
rotation of a sphere, [10]’s motion planning algorithm used the mechanics of pushing to funnel an
object into a stable grasp state, and [11]’s controller used the conservation of mechanical energy to
control the tilt of a palm and roll objects to desired positions on the hand. These types of manipula-
tion techniques have thus far struggled to scale to more complex tasks or sophisticated manipulators
in simulation as well as the real world, perhaps due to their need for precise characterization of the
system and its environment. Reasoning through contact models and motions cones [12, 13], for ex-
ample, requires computation time that scales exponentially with the number of contacts, and has thus
been limited to simpler manipulators and more controlled tasks. In this work, we aim to significantly
scale up the complexity of feasible tasks, while also minimizing such task-specific formulations.


                                                    2
More recent work in deep RL has studied this question through the use of data-driven learning to
make sense of observed phenomenon [14, 2]. These methods, while powerful, require large amounts
of system interaction to learn successful control policies, making them difficult to apply in the real
world. Some work [4, 5] has used expert demonstrations to improve this sample efficiency. In
contrast, our method is sample efficient without requiring any expert demonstrations, and is still able
to leverage data-driven learning techniques to acquire challenging dexterous manipulation skills.
Model-based RL has the potential to provide both efficient and flexible learning. In fact, methods
that assume perfect knowledge of system dynamics can achieve very impressive manipulation be-
haviors [15, 16] using generally applicable learning and control techniques. Other work has focused
on learning these models using high-capacity function approximators [17, 18, 3, 19, 20, 21, 22] and
probabilistic dynamics models [23, 24, 25, 26]. Our method combines components from multiple
prior works, including uncertainty estimation [23, 22, 27], deep models and model-predictive control
(MPC) [19], and stochastic optimization for planning [28]. Model-based RL methods, including re-
cent work in uncertainty estimation [29] and combining policy networks with online planning [30],
have unfortunately mostly been studied and shown on lower-dimensional (and often, simulated)
benchmark tasks, and scaling these methods to higher dimensional tasks such as dexterous manip-
ulation has proven to be a challenge. As illustrated in our evaluation, the particular synthesis of
different ideas in this work allows model-based RL to push forward the task complexity of achiev-
able dexterous manipulation skills, and to extend this progress to even a real-world robotic hand.


3     Deep Models for Dexterous Manipulation
In order to leverage the benefits of autonomous learning from data-driven methods while also en-
abling efficient and flexible task execution, we extend deep model-based RL approaches to the
domain of dexterous manipulation. Our method of online planning with deep dynamics models
(PDDM) builds on prior work that uses MPC with deep models [20] and ensembles for model un-
certainty estimation [22]. However, as we illustrate in our experiments, the particular combination
of components is critical for the success of our method on complex dexterous manipulation tasks and
allows it to substantially outperform these prior model-based algorithms as well as strong model-free
baselines.

3.1   Model-Based Reinforcement Learning
We first define the model-based RL problem. Consider a Markov decision process (MDP) with a
set of states S, a set of actions A, and a state transition distribution p(s0 |s, a) describing the result
of taking action a from state s. The task is specified by a bounded reward function r(s, a), and
the goal of RL is to select actions in such a way as to maximize the expected sum of rewards over
a trajectory. Model-based RL aims to solve this problem by first learning an approximate model
p̂θ (s0 |s, a), parameterized by θ, that approximates the unknown transition distribution p(s0 |s, a) of
the underlying system dynamics. The parameters θ can be learned to maximize the log-likelihood
of observed data D, and the learned model’s predictions can then be used to either learn a policy or,
as we do in this work, to perform online planning to select optimal actions.

3.2   Learning the Dynamics
We use a deep neural network model to represent p̂θ (s0 |s, a), such that our model has enough ca-
pacity to capture the complex interactions involved in dexterous manipulation. We use a parame-
terization of the form p̂θ (s0 |s, a) = N (fˆθ (s, a), Σ), where the mean fˆθ (s, a) is given by a neural
network, and the covariance Σ of the conditional Gaussian distribution can also be learned (although
we found this to be unnecessary for good results). As prior work has indicated, capturing epistemic
uncertainty in the network weights is indeed important in model-based RL, especially with high-
capacity models that are liable to overfit to the training set and extrapolate erroneously outside of it.
A simple and inexpensive way to do this is to employ bootstrap ensembles [22], which approximate
the posterior p(θ|D) with a set of E models, each with parameters θi . For deep models, prior work
has observed that bootstrap resampling is unnecessary, and it is sufficient to simply initialize each
model θi with a different random initialization θi0 and use different batches of data Di at each train
step [22]. We note that this supervised learning setup makes more efficient use of the data than the
counterpart model-free methods, since we get dense training signals from each state transition and
we are able to use all data (even off-policy data) to make training progress.

                                                    3
3.3 Online Planning for Closed-Loop Control
In our method, we use online planning with MPC to select actions via our model predictions. At
each time step, our method performs a short-horizon trajectory optimization, using the model to
predict the outcomes of different action sequences. We can use a variety of gradient-free optimizers
to address this optimization; we describe a few particular choices below, each of which builds on
the previous ones, with the last and most sophisticated optimizer being the one that is used by our
PDDM algorithm.
Random Shooting: The simplest gradient-free optimizer simply generates N independent ran-
dom action sequences {A0 . . . AN }, where each sequence Ai = {ai0 . . . aiH−1 } is of length H
action. Given a reward function r(s, a) that defines the task, and given future state predictions
ŝt+1 = fθ (ŝt , at ) + ŝt from the learned dynamics model fθ , the optimal action sequence Ai∗
is selected to be the one corresponding to the sequence with highest predicted reward: i∗ =
                              Pt+H−1
arg maxi Ri = arg maxi t0 =t r(ŝt0 , ait0 ). This approach has been shown to achieve success
on continuous control tasks with learned models [20], but it has numerous drawbacks: it scales
poorly with the dimension of both the planning horizon and the action space, and it often is insuffi-
cient for achieving high task performance since a sequence of actions sampled at random often does
not directly lead to meaningful behavior.
Iterative Random-Shooting with Refinement: To address these issues, much prior work [31]
has instead taken a cross-entropy method (CEM) approach, which begins as the random shooting
approach, but then does this sampling for multiple iterations m ∈ {0 . . . M } at each time step. The
top J highest-scoring action sequences from each iteration are used to update and refine the mean
and variance of the sampling distribution for the next iteration, as follows:
               Ai = {ai0 . . . aiH−1 }, where ait ∼ N (µm    m
                                                        t , Σt ) ∀i ∈ N, t ∈ 0 . . . H − 1
            Aelites = sort(Ai )[−J :]
            µm+1
             t   = α ∗ mean(Aelites ) + (1 − α)µm
                                                t ∀t ∈ 0 . . . H − 1
            Σm+1
             t   = α ∗ var(Aelites ) + (1 − α)Σm
                                               t ∀t ∈ 0 . . . H − 1                                  (1)
After M iterations, the optimal actions are selected to be the resulting mean of the action distribution.
Filtering and Reward-Weighted Refinement: While CEM is a stronger optimizer than random
shooting, it still scales poorly with dimensionality and is hard to apply when both coordination and
precision are required. PDDM instead uses a stronger optimizer that considers covariances between
time steps and uses a softer update rule that more effectively integrates a larger number of samples
into the distribution update. As derived by recent model-predictive path integral work [28, 16], this
general update rule takes the following form for time step t, reward-weighting factor γ, and reward
Rk from each of the N predicted trajectories:
                                  PN                (k)
                                         (eγ·Rk )(at )
                            µt = k=0  PN γ·(R )         ∀t ∈ {0 . . . H − 1}.                     (2)
                                        j=0 e
                                                  j



Rather than sampling our action samples from a random policy or from iteratively refined Gaussians,
we instead apply a filtering technique to explicitly produce smoother candidate action sequences.
Given the iteratively updating mean distribution µt from above, we generate N action sequences
ait = nit + µt , where each noise sample nit is generated using filtering coefficient β as follows:
                        uit ∼ N (0, Σ) ∀i ∈ {0 . . . N − 1}, t ∈ {0 . . . H − 1}                     (3)
                       nit = β · uit + (1 − β) · nit−1   where nt<0 = 0                              (4)
By coupling time steps to each other, this filtering also reduces the effective degrees of freedom or
dimensionality of the search space, thus allowing for better scaling with dimensionality.
3.4 Overview
Each of the optimization methods described in the previous sections can be combined with our
ensemble-based dynamics models to produce a complete model-based RL method. In our approach,
the reward Rk for each action sequence is calculated to be the mean predicted reward across all
models θi of the ensemble, allowing for model disagreement to affect our chosen actions. After
using the predicted rewards to optimize for an H-step candidate action sequence, we employ MPC,


                                                   4
                                                     ∗
where the agent executes only the first action ait , receives updated state information st+1 , and then
replans at the following time step. The closed-loop method of replanning using updated information
at every time step helps to mitigate some model inaccuraries by preventing accumulating model
error. Note this control procedure also allows us to easily swap out new reward functions or goals at
run-time, independent of the trained model. Overall, the full procedure of PDDM involves iteratively
performing actions in the real world (through online planning with the use of a learned model), and
then using those observations to update that learned model.

4     Experimental Evaluation
Our evaluation aims to address the following questions: (1) Can our method autonomously learn
to accomplish a variety of complex dexterous manipulation tasks? (2) What is the effect of the
various design decisions in our method? (3) How does our method’s performance as well as sample
efficiency compare to that of other state-of-the-art algorithms? (4) How general and versatile is
the learned model? (5) Can we apply these lessons learned from simulation to enable a 24-DoF
humanoid hand to manipulate free-floating objects in the real world?

4.1   Task Suite

Some of the main challenges in dexterous ma-
nipulation involve the high dimensionality of
the hand, the prevalence of complex contact dy-
namics that must be utilized and balanced to
manipulate free floating objects, and the po-
tential for failure. We identified a set of tasks
(Figure 2) that specifically highlight these chal-
lenges by requiring delicate, precise, and coor-
dinated movement. With the final goal in mind
of real-world experiments on a 24-DoF hand,
we first set up these selected dexterous manip-
ulation tasks in MuJoCo [32] and conducted
experiments in simulation on two robotic plat-
forms: a 9-DoF three-fingered hand, and a 24-
DoF five-fingered hand. We show in Figure 3
the successful executions of PDDM on these
tasks, which took between 1-2 hours worth of
data for simulated tasks and 2-4 hours worth of
data for the real-world experiments. We include
implementation details, reward functions, and
hyperparameters in the appendix, but we first
provide brief task overviews below.
                                                  Figure 3: Successful executions of PDDM on simu-
Valve Turning: This starter task for look- lated and real-world dexterous manipulation tasks.
ing into manipulation challenges uses a 9-DoF
hand (D’Claw) [5] to turn a 1-DoF valve to arbitrary target locations. Here, the fingers must come
into contact with the object and coordinate themselves to make continued progress toward the target.

In-hand Reorientation: Next, we look into the manipulation of free-floating objects, where most
maneuvers lead to task failures of dropping objects, and thus sharp discontinuities in the dynamics.
Successful manipulation of free-floating objects, such as this task of reorienting a cube into a goal
pose, requires careful stabilization strategies as well as re-grasping strategies. Note that these chal-
lenges exist even in cases where system dynamics are fully known, let alone with learned models.

Handwriting: In addition to free-floating objects, the requirement of precision is a further chal-
lenge when planning with approximate models. Handwriting, in particular, requires precise maneu-
vering of all joints in order to control the movement of the pencil tip and enable legible writing.
Furthermore, the previously mentioned challenges of local minima (i.e., holding the pencil still),
abundant terminal states (i.e., dropping the pencil), and the need for simultaneous coordination of
numerous joints still apply. This task can also test flexibility of learned behaviors, by requiring the
agent to follow arbitrary writing patterns as opposed to only a specific stroke.

                                                         5
Baoding Balls: While manipulation of one free object is already a challenge, sharing the compact
workspace with other objects exacerbates the challenge and truly tests the dexterity of the manipu-
lator. We examine this challenge with Baoding balls, where the goal is to rotate two balls around
the palm without dropping them. The objects influence the dynamics of not only the hand, but also
each other; inconsistent movement of either one knocks the other out of the hand, leading to failure.

4.2 Ablations and Analysis of Design Decisions
In our first set of experiments (Fig. 4), we evaluate the impact of the design decisions for our model
and our online planning method. We use the Baoding balls task for these experiments, though we
observed similar trends on other tasks. In the first plot, we see that a sufficiently large architecture
is crucial, indicating that the model must have enough capacity to represent the complex dynamical
system. In the second plot, we see that the use of ensembles is helpful, especially earlier in training
when non-ensembled models can overfit badly and thus exhibit overconfident and harmful behavior.
This suggests that ensembles are an enabling factor in using sufficiently high-capacity models. In
the third plot, we see that there is not much difference between resetting model weights randomly at
each training iteration versus warmstarting them from their previous values.
In the fourth plot, we see that using a planning horizon that is either too long or too short can be
detrimental: Short horizons lead to greedy planning, while long horizons suffer from compounding
errors in the predictions. In the fifth plot, we study the type of planning algorithm and see that
PDDM, with action smoothing and soft updates, greatly outperforms the others. In the final plot, we
study the effect of the γ reward-weighting variable, showing that medium values provide the best
balance of dimensionality reduction and smooth integration of action samples versus loss of control
authority. Here, too soft of a weighting leads to minimal movement of the hand, and too hard of a
weighting leads to aggressive behaviors that frequently drop the objects.

4.3 Comparisons
In this section, we compare our method to the following state-of-the-art model-based and model-free
RL algorithms: Nagabandi et. al [20] learns a deterministic neural network model, combined with
a random shooting MPC controller; PETS [27] combines uncertainty-aware deep network dynam-
ics models with sampling-based uncertainty propagation; NPG [33] is a model-free natural policy
gradient method, and has been used in prior work on learning manipulation skills [4]; SAC [34] is
an off-policy model-free RL algorithm; MBPO [35] is a recent hybrid approach that uses data from
its model to accelerate policy learning. On our suite of dexterous manipulation tasks, PDDM con-
sistently outperforms prior methods both in terms of learning speed and final performance, even
solving tasks that prior methods cannot.
Valve turning: We first experiment with a three-fingered hand rotating a valve, with starting and
goal positions chosen randomly from the range [−π, π]. On this simpler task, we confirm that most
of the prior methods do in fact succeed, and we also see that even on this simpler task, policy gradient
approaches such as NPG require prohibitively large amounts of data (note the log scale of Figure 5).

                                                    Model Architecture                                                              Ensemble Size                                                        Warmstart from Previous Model
                                   1.0                                                                            1.0                                                                          1.0




          Normalized Task Reward                                                         Normalized Task Reward                                                       Normalized Task Reward
                                   0.5                                                                            0.5                                                                          0.5

                                                                            2x64                                                                             1
                                                                            2x250                                                                            3                                                                          False
                                                                            2x500                                                                            5                                                                          True
                                   0.0                                                                            0.0                                                                          0.0
                                             0       100000        200000                                                   0     100000          200000                                             0          100000        200000
                                                   Number of datapoints                                                         Number of datapoints                                                         Number of datapoints

                                                         Horizon                                                                     Controller                                                             γ for Reward-Weighting
                                   1.0                                                                            1.0                                                                          1.0




     Normalized Task Reward                                                         Normalized Task Reward                                                       Normalized Task Reward
                                   0.5                                                                            0.5                                                                          0.5                                     γ1
                                                                              2                                                                                                                                                        γ 10
                                                                              5                                                   Filtering + Reward Weighting                                                                         γ 20
                                                                              7                                                   CEM                                                                                                  γ 50
                                                                              15                                  0.0             Random-shooting                                                                                      γ 100
                                   0.0                                                                                                                                                         0.0
                                         0       50000    100000     150000                                             0       50000         100000                                                 0            100000             200000
                                                  Number of datapoints                                                          Number of datapoints                                                         Number of datapoints


Figure 4: Baoding task performance for various design decisions: (Top) model architecture, ensemble size,
warmstarting model weights, and (Bottom) planning horizon, controller type, and reward-weighting variable γ.

                                                                                                                                        6
                                                        Valve Turning                                                                         Reorient: 2 Goal Angles                                                         Reorient: 8 Goal Angles
                       500                                                                                              0.0                                                                    0.0
                                     MBPO                                                                                                                                                                                                             MBPO
                                     PETS                                                                                                                                                                                                             SAC
                       250
                                     Nagabandi et. al                                                                                                                                                                                                 NPG
                                     SAC                                                                               −0.5                                                                   −0.5
                         0                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PDDM (Ours)
                                     NPG



 Task Reward                                                                                             Task Reward
                 −250                PDDM (Ours)
                                                                                                                       −1.0                                                                   −1.0
                 −500
                                                                                                                                                                       MBPO
                                                                                                                                                                       PETS
                 −750
                                                                                                                                                                       Nagabandi et. al
                                                                                                                       −1.5                                                                   −1.5
                                                                                                                                                                       SAC
               −1000
                                                                                                                                                                       NPG
               −1250                                                                                                                                                   PDDM (Ours)
                                                                                                                       −2.0                                                                   −2.0
                                   102            103         104           105            106                                0               100000                200000           300000          0                             200000                   400000
                                         Number of datapoints (log scale)                                                                       Number of datapoints                                                           Number of datapoints


 Figure 5: Most methods learn                                                                            Figure 6: In-hand reorientation of a cube. Our method achieves the best
 this easier task of valve turning,                                                                      results with 2 and 8 goal angles, and model-free algorithms and methods
 though our method learns fastest.                                                                       that directly learn a policy, such as MBPO, struggle with 8 goal angles.

                                          Handwriting: Fixed Trajectory                                                       Handwriting: Arbitrary Trajectories                                                                        Baoding Balls
                       −5
                                                                                                 −7.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.0
                       −10
                                                                                                 −10.0



 Mean Tracking Error
                       −15                                                                       −12.5
                                                                        PETS



                                                                                                                                                                                                     Task Reward
                                                                                                 −15.0
                       −20                                              Nagabandi et. al
                                                                        SAC                      −17.5


 of Pencil Tip (mm)
                       −25                                              NPG                                                                                                                                        −0.1                                  MBPO
                                                                        PDDM (Ours)              −20.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PETS
                       −30                                                                       −22.5                                                                                                                                                   Nagabandi et. al
                                                                                                                                                          SAC                                                                                            SAC
                       −35                                                                       −25.0                                                    NPG                                                                                            NPG
                                                                                                                                                          PDDM (Ours)                                                                                    PDDM (Ours)
                                                                                                 −27.5
                       −40                                                                                                                                                                                         −0.2
                             0.0         0.2        0.4        0.6        0.8       1.0                    0.0                    0.1         0.2         0.3           0.4                                               0      50000      100000       150000
                                               Number of datapoints (M)                                                           Number of datapoints (M)                                                                           Number of datapoints


 Figure 7: Manipulating a pencil to make its tip follow (left) a fixed de- Figure 8: PDDM outperforms
 sired path, where PDDM learns substantially faster than SAC and NPG, prior model-based and model-
 and (right) arbitrary paths, where only PDDM succeeds.               free methods.

In-hand reorientation: Next, we scale up our method to a 24-DoF five-fingered hand reorienting a
free-floating object to arbitrary goal configurations (Figure 6). First, we prescribe two possible goals
of either left or right 90◦ rotations; here, SAC behaves similarly to our method (actually attaining
a higher final reward), and NPG is slow as expected, but does achieve the same high reward after
6e6 steps. However, when we increase the number of possible goals to 8 different options (90◦
and 45◦ rotations in the left, right, up, and down directions), we see that our method still succeeds,
but the model-free approaches get stuck in local optima and are unable to fully achieve even the
previously attainable goals. This inability to effectively address a “multi-task” or “multi-goal” setup
is indeed a known drawback for model-free approaches, and it is particularly pronounced in such
goal-conditioned tasks that require flexibility. These additional goals do not make the task harder
for PDDM, because even in learning 90◦ rotations, it is building a model of its interactions rather
than specifically learning to get to those angles.
Handwriting: To further scale up task complexity, we experiment with handwriting, where the
base of the hand is fixed and all writing must be done through coordinated movement of the fingers
and the wrist. We perform two variations of this task: (a) the agent is trained and tested on writing
a single fixed trajectory, and (b) the agent is trained with the goal of following arbitrary trajectories,
but is evaluated on the fixed trajectory from (a). Although even a fixed writing trajectory is chal-
lenging, writing arbitrary trajectories requires a degree of flexibility that is exceptionally difficult
for prior methods. We see in Figure 7 that prior model-based approaches don’t actually solve this
task (values below the grey line correspond to holding the pencil still near the middle of the paper).
Our method, SAC, and NPG solve the task for a single fixed trajectory, but the model-free methods
fail when presented with arbitrary trajectories and become stuck in a local optima when trying to
write arbitrary trajectories. Even SAC, which has a higher entropy action distribution and therefore
achieves better exploration, is unable to extract the finer underlying skill due to the landscape for
successful behaviors being quite narrow.
Baoding Balls: This task is particularly challenging due to the inter-object interactions, which can
lead to drastically discontinuous dynamics and frequent failures from dropping the objects. We were
unable to get the other model-based or model-free methods to succeed at this task (Figure 8), but
PDDM solves it using just 100,000 data points, or 2.7 hours worth of data. Additionally, we can
employ the model that was trained on 100-step rollouts to then run for much longer (1000 steps)
at test time. The model learned for this task can also be repurposed, without additional training, to
perform a variety of related tasks (see video): moving a single ball to a goal location in the hand,
posing the hand, and performing clockwise rotations instead of the learned counter-clockwise ones.


                                                                                                                                                        7
Figure 9: Real-world Baoding balls hardware setup with the ShadowHand (left), Franka-Emika arm used for
the automated reset mechanism (middle), and the resulting success rates for 90◦ and 180◦ turns (right).

4.4 Learning Real-World Manipulation of Baoding Balls
Finally, we present an evaluation of PDDM on a real-world anthropomorphic robotic hand. We
use the 24-DoF Shadow Hand to manipulate Baoding balls, and we train our method entirely with
real-world experience, without any simulation or prior knowledge of the system.
Hardware setup: In order to run this experiment in the real world (Figure 9), we use a camera
tracker to produce 3D position estimates for the Baoding balls. We employ a dilated CNN model
for object tracking, modeled after KeypointNet [36], which takes a 280x180 RGB stereo image
pair as input from a calibrated 12 cm baseline camera rig. Additional details on the tracker are
provided in Appendix A. As shown in the supplementary video, we also implement an automated
reset mechanism, which consists of a ramp that funnels the dropped Baoding balls to a specific
position and then triggers a pre-preprogrammed 7-DoF Franka-Emika arm to use its parallel jaw
gripper to pick them up and return them to the Shadow Hand’s palm. The planner commands the
hand at 10Hz, which is communicated via a 0-order hold to the low-level position controller that
operates at 1Khz. The episode terminates if the specific task horizon of 10 seconds has elapsed or if
the hand drops either ball, at which point a reset request is issued again. Numerous sources of delays
in real robotic systems, in addition to the underactuated nature of the real Shadow Hand, make the
task quite challenging in the real world.
Results: Our method is able to learn 90◦ rotations without dropping the two Baoding balls after
under 2 hours of real-world training, with a success rate of about 100%, and can achieve a success
rate of about 54% on the challenging 180◦ rotation task, as shown in Figure 9. An example trajectory
of the robot rotating the Baoding balls using our method is shown in Figure 1, and videos on the
project website 1 illustrate task progress through various stages of training. Qualitatively, we note
that performance improves fastest during the first 1.5 hours of trainingl; after this, the system must
learn the more complex transition of transferring the control of a Baoding ball from the pinky to
the thumb (with a period of time in between, where the hand has only indirect control of the ball
through wrist movement). These results illustrate that, although the real-world version of this task
is substantially more challenging than its simulated counterpart, our method can learn to perform it
with considerable proficiency using a modest amount of real-world training data.

5       Discussion
We presented a method for using deep model-based RL to learn dexterous manipulation skills with
multi-fingered hands. We demonstrated results on challenging non-prehensile manipulation tasks,
including controlling free-floating objects, agile finger gaits for repositioning objects in the hand,
and precise control of a pencil to write user-specified strokes. As we show in our experiments, our
method achieves substantially better results than prior deep model-based RL methods, and it also has
advantages over model-free RL: it requires substantially less training data and results in a model that
can be flexibly reused to perform a wide variety of user-specified tasks. In direct comparisons, our
approach substantially outperforms state-of-the-art model-free RL methods on tasks that demand
high flexibility, such as writing user-specified characters. In addition to analyzing the approach on
our simulated suite of tasks using 1-2 hours worth of training data, we demonstrate PDDM on a real-
world 24 DoF anthropomorphic hand, showing successful in-hand manipulation of objects using
just 4 hours worth of entirely real-world interactions. Promising directions for future work include
studying methods for planning at different levels of abstraction in order to succeed at sparse-reward
or long-horizon tasks, as well as studying the effective integration of additional sensing modalities
such as vision and touch into these models in order to better understand the world.
    1
        https://sites.google.com/view/pddm/


                                                      8
References
 [1] A. M. Okamura, N. Smaby, and M. R. Cutkosky. An overview of dexterous manipulation. In
     Robotics and Automation, 2000. Proceedings. ICRA’00. IEEE International Conference on,
     volume 1, pages 255–262. IEEE, 2000.
 [2] H. Van Hoof, T. Hermans, G. Neumann, and J. Peters. Learning robot in-hand manipulation
     with tactile features. In Humanoid Robots (Humanoids), 2015 IEEE-RAS 15th International
     Conference on, pages 121–127. IEEE, 2015.
 [3] S. Levine, C. Finn, T. Darrell, and P. Abbeel. End-to-end training of deep visuomotor policies.
     Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR), 2016.
 [4] A. Rajeswaran, V. Kumar, A. Gupta, G. Vezzani, J. Schulman, E. Todorov, and S. Levine.
     Learning complex dexterous manipulation with deep reinforcement learning and demonstra-
     tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.10087, 2017.
 [5] H. Zhu, A. Gupta, A. Rajeswaran, S. Levine, and V. Kumar. Dexterous manipulation with deep
     reinforcement learning: Efficient, general, and low-cost. In 2019 International Conference on
     Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 3651–3657. IEEE, 2019.
 [6] J. Butterfaß, M. Grebenstein, H. Liu, and G. Hirzinger. Dlr-hand ii: Next generation of a
     dextrous robot hand. In Robotics and Automation, 2001. Proceedings 2001 ICRA. IEEE Inter-
     national Conference on, volume 1, pages 109–114. IEEE, 2001.
 [7] Z. Xu and E. Todorov. Design of a highly biomimetic anthropomorphic robotic hand towards
     artificial limb regeneration. In 2016 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automa-
     tion (ICRA), pages 3485–3492. IEEE, 2016.
 [8] B. Sundaralingam and T. Hermans. Geometric in-hand regrasp planning: Alternating opti-
     mization of finger gaits and in-grasp manipulation. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on
     Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 231–238. IEEE, 2018.
 [9] S. Andrews and P. G. Kry. Goal directed multi-finger manipulation: Control policies and
     analysis. Computers & Graphics, 37(7):830–839, 2013.
[10] M. R. Dogar and S. S. Srinivasa. Push-grasping with dexterous hands: Mechanics and a
     method. In Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2010 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
     on, pages 2123–2130. IEEE, 2010.
[11] Y. Bai and C. K. Liu. Dexterous manipulation using both palm and fingers. In Robotics and
     Automation (ICRA), 2014 IEEE International Conference on, pages 1560–1565. IEEE, 2014.
[12] N. Chavan-Dafle, R. Holladay, and A. Rodriguez. In-hand manipulation via motion cones.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.00219, 2018.
[13] R. Kolbert, N. Chavan-Dafle, and A. Rodriguez. Experimental validation of contact dynamics
     for in-hand manipulation. In International Symposium on Experimental Robotics, pages 633–
     645. Springer, 2016.
[14] M. Andrychowicz, B. Baker, M. Chociej, R. Jozefowicz, B. McGrew, J. Pachocki, A. Petron,
     M. Plappert, G. Powell, A. Ray, et al. Learning dexterous in-hand manipulation. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1808.00177, 2018.
[15] I. Mordatch, Z. Popović, and E. Todorov. Contact-invariant optimization for hand manipula-
     tion. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics symposium on computer anima-
     tion, pages 137–144. Eurographics Association, 2012.
[16] K. Lowrey, A. Rajeswaran, S. Kakade, E. Todorov, and I. Mordatch. Plan online, learn offline:
     Efficient learning and exploration via model-based control. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.01848,
     2018.
[17] M. P. Deisenroth, G. Neumann, J. Peters, et al. A survey on policy search for robotics. Foun-
     dations and Trends R in Robotics, 2(1–2):1–142, 2013.


                                                 9
[18] I. Lenz, R. A. Knepper, and A. Saxena. Deepmpc: Learning deep latent features for model
     predictive control. In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2015.
[19] A. Nagabandi, G. Yang, T. Asmar, R. Pandya, G. Kahn, S. Levine, and R. S. Fearing. Learning
     image-conditioned dynamics models for control of under-actuated legged millirobots. arXiv
     preprint arXiv:1711.05253, 2017.
[20] A. Nagabandi, G. Kahn, R. S. Fearing, and S. Levine. Neural network dynamics for model-
     based deep reinforcement learning with model-free fine-tuning. In 2018 IEEE International
     Conference on Robotics and Automation, ICRA 2018, Brisbane, Australia, May 21-25, 2018,
     pages 7559–7566, 2018.
[21] G. Williams, N. Wagener, B. Goldfain, P. Drews, J. M. Rehg, B. Boots, and E. A. Theodorou.
     Information theoretic mpc for model-based reinforcement learning. In International Confer-
     ence on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2017.
[22] K. Chua, R. Calandra, R. McAllister, and S. Levine. Deep reinforcement learning in a handful
     of trials using probabilistic dynamics models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems 31: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2018, NeurIPS
     2018, 3-8 December 2018, Montréal, Canada., pages 4759–4770, 2018.
[23] M. Deisenroth and C. Rasmussen. A model-based and data-efficient approach to policy search.
     In ICML, 2011.
[24] J. Ko and D. Fox. GP-BayesFilters: Bayesian filtering using gaussian process prediction and
     observation models. In IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intell. Robots and Systems, 2008.
[25] M. P. Deisenroth, R. Calandra, A. Seyfarth, and J. Peters. Toward fast policy search for learning
     legged locomotion. In IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intell. Robots and Systems, pages 1787–1792,
     2012.
[26] A. Doerr, D. Nguyen-Tuong, A. Marco, S. Schaal, and S. Trimpe. Model-based policy search
     for automatic tuning of multivariate PID controllers. CoRR, abs/1703.02899, 2017. URL
     http://arxiv.org/abs/1703.02899.
[27] T. Kurutach, I. Clavera, Y. Duan, A. Tamar, and P. Abbeel. Model-ensemble trust-region policy
     optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.10592, 2018.
[28] G. Williams, A. Aldrich, and E. Theodorou. Model predictive path integral control using
     covariance variable importance sampling. CoRR, abs/1509.01149, 2015.
[29] A. Malik, V. Kuleshov, J. Song, D. Nemer, H. Seymour, and S. Ermon. Calibrated model-based
     deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08312, 2019.
[30] T. Wang and J. Ba. Exploring model-based planning with policy networks. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1906.08649, 2019.
[31] Z. I. Botev, D. P. Kroese, R. Y. Rubinstein, and P. LEcuyer. The cross-entropy method for
     optimization. In Handbook of statistics, volume 31, pages 35–59. Elsevier, 2013.
[32] E. Todorov, T. Erez, and Y. Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control. In
     International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2012.
[33] S. M. Kakade. A natural policy gradient. In Advances in neural information processing sys-
     tems, pages 1531–1538, 2002.
[34] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum entropy
     deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.01290, 2018.
[35] M. Janner, J. Fu, M. Zhang, and S. Levine. When to trust your model: Model-based policy
     optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08253, 2019.
[36] S. Suwajanakorn, N. Snavely, J. Tompson, and M. Norouzi. Discovery of latent 3d keypoints
     via end-to-end geometric reasoning. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS ’18,
     2018.
[37] D. Kingma and J. Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR, 2014.


                                                 10
Appendix

A    Method Overview
At a high level, this method (Figure 10, Algorithm 1) of online planning with deep dynamics models
involves an iterative procedure of (a) running a controller to perform action selection using predic-
tions from a trained predictive dynamics model, and (b) training a dynamics model to fit that col-
lected data. With recent improvements in both modeling procedures as well as control schemes using
these high-capacity learned models, we are able to demonstrate efficient and autonomous learning
of complex dexterous manipulation tasks.


                                                                                       store executed trajectories

                                                                 𝜋 𝑠 = argmax 𝒓(𝑠, 𝑎43 , 𝑎45 , 𝑎46 … )
                                         𝑓" 𝑠, 𝑎 = 𝑠′                        /0



                             Train                            Predict                          Command
                    Data
                           every once
                           in a while   Neural Network
                                                                             Controller                              System
                                        Dynamics Model
                                              𝑟 𝑠, 𝑎 = 𝒓




                                            Reward function
                ITERATIVE TRAINING                                                                                   RUN-TIME


        Figure 10: Overview diagram of our online planning with deep dynamics models (PDDM).


Algorithm 1 PDDM Overview
 1: randomly initialize ensemble of models {θ0 , . . . , θM }
 2: initialize empty dataset D ← {}
 3: for iter in range(I) do
 4:    for rollout in range(R) do
 5:       s0 ← reset env
 6:       for t in range(T ) do
 7:          a ← PDDMMPC (st , {fθ0 , . . . , fθM }, H, N, r, γ, β)
 8:          st+1 ← take action a
 9:          D ← (st , at , st+1 )
10:       end for
11:    end for
12:    use D to train models {fθ0 , . . . , fθM } for E epochs each
13: end for



B    Experiment Details
We implement the dynamics model as a neural network of 2 fully-connected hidden layers of size
500 with relu nonlinearities and a final fully-connected output layer. For all tasks and environments,
we train this same model architecture with a standard mean squared error (MSE) supervised learning
loss, using the Adam optimizer [37] with learning rate 0.001. Each epoch of model training, as
mentioned in Algorithm 1, consists of a single pass through the dataset D while taking a gradient
step for every sampled batch of size 500 data points. The other relevant hyperparameters are listed
in Table 1, referenced by task. For each of these tasks, we normalize the action spaces to [−1, 1] and
                              1
act at a control frequency of dt . We list reward functions and other relevant task details in Table 2.




                                                                 11
                                       Table 1: Hyperparameters

                                          R     T        H       N       γ        β       M      E

                   Valve Turning         20     200      7       200     10       0.6      3    40

               In-hand Reorientation     30     100      7       700     50       0.7      3    40

                    Handwriting          40     100      7       700     0.5      0.5      3    40

                   Baoding Balls         30     100      7       700     20       0.7      3    40

                                         Table 2: Task details

                            dt (sec)    Dim of s      Dim of a                     Reward r(s, a)

                             0.15          21                9                  −10|valveθ − targetθ |

       Valve Turning                                                     +1(|valveθ − targetθ | < 0.25)

                                                                       +10 ∗ 1(|valveθ − targetθ | < 0.1)

                              0.1          46            24                    −7||cuberpy − targetrpy ||
    In-hand Reorientation
                                                                                   −10001(isdrop)

                              0.1          48            24                    −100||tipxy − targetxy ||

        Handwriting                                                                     −20||tipz ||

                                                                          −101(forwardtipping > 0)

                              0.1          40            24               −5||objectsxyz − targetsxyz ||
       Baoding Balls
                                                                                   −5001(isdrop)


C     Tracker Details
In order to run this experiment in the real world, we use a camera tracker to produce 3D position
estimates for the Baoding balls. The camera tracker serves the purpose of providing low latency,
robust, and accurate 3D position estimates of the Baoding balls. To enable this tracking, we employ
a dilated CNN modeled after the one in KeypointNet [36]. The input to the system is a 280x180
RGB stereo pair (no explicit depth) from a calibrated 12 cm baseline camera rig. The output is a
spatial softmax for the 2D location and depth of the center of each sphere in camera frame. Standard
pinhole camera equations convert 2D and depth into 3D points in the camera frame, and an additional
calibration finally converts it into to the ShadowHand’s coordinates system. Training of the model is
done in sim, with fine-tuning on real-world data. Our semi-automated process of composing static
scenes with the spheres, moving the strero rig, and using VSLAM algorithms to label the images
using relative poses of the camera views substantially decreased the amount of hand-labelling that
was requiring. We hand-labeled only about 100 images in 25 videos, generating over 10,000 training
images. We observe average tracking errors of 5 mm and latency of 20 ms, split evenly between
image capture and model inference.




                                                    12
