

===== PAGE 1 =====
1
Part-Guided 3D RL for Sim2Real Articulated
Object Manipulation
Pengwei Xie∗1,5, Rui Chen∗3, Siang Chen∗1,2,5, Yuzhe Qin4, Fanbo Xiang4, Tianyu Sun1,5,
Jing Xu3, Guijin Wang†1,2,5, Hao Su4
Abstract—Manipulating unseen articulated objects through
Simulation
visual feedback is a critical but challenging task for real robots.
Existing learning-based solutions mainly focus on visual affor-
dance learning or other pre-trained visual models to guide manip-
ulation policies, which face challenges for novel instances in real-
world scenarios. In this paper, we propose a novel part-guided OpenDoor OpenDrawer TurnFaucet
3D RL framework, which can learn to manipulate articulated
objects without demonstrations. We combine the strengths of 2D
segmentation and 3D RL to improve the efficiency of RL policy Part Sampled Points A Versatile
training. To improve the stability of the policy on real robots, 3D RL policy
we design a Frame-consistent Uncertainty-aware Sampling (FUS)
strategy to get a condensed and hierarchical 3D representation.
Real
In addition, a single versatile RL policy can be trained on
multiple articulated object manipulation tasks simultaneously in
simulation and shows great generalizability to novel categories
and instances. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness
of our framework in both simulation and real-world settings. Our
code is available at https://github.com/THU-VCLab/Part-Guided-
3D-RL-for-Sim2Real-Articulated-Object-Manipulation
Fig. 1. Our 3D RL framework can be trained for various articulated object
Index Terms—Deep Learning in Grasping and Manipulation; manipulation tasks in simulation simultaneously and efficiently. After training,
RGB-D Perception; Reinforcement Learning without any demonstrations, the versatile RL policy can be deployed to a real
robot and perform different tasks.
I. INTRODUCTION
A RTICULATED object manipulation is a fundamental the generalizability and robustness of these methods on real
problem in robotics. Unlike object grasping, which only robots have yet to be sufficiently evaluated.
requires stable contact between the gripper and the object [1],
In this work, we propose an efficient part-guided 3D RL
[2], articulated objects manipulation involves controlling the
framework for articulated object manipulation without any
relative motion of their parts and is more challenging due to
demonstrations, as shown in Fig. 1. First, we train a part
the complex kinematic structures and dynamic properties.
segmentation module on synthetic data and implement it to
Recently, learning-based methods have emerged as a
segment the 2D image into different articulated parts. Then,
promising approach to learning manipulation policies from
we transform the segmentation result into 3D points with part
visual inputs [3]–[9]. Some approaches, such as [8], [9],
information, as 3D representations are more appropriate for
reconstruct the object and estimate its kinematic and dynamic
reasoning the relationship between the robot and the object.
properties, but require interactive perception and are not prac-
Finally, we extract geometric features from the points to guide
tical for novel objects. Other methods [3]–[7] learn visual
the RL policy training. By leveraging the strength of both the
affordance information to guide the manipulation policies.
2D segmentation network and 3D RL, our framework not only
However, these methods still face several limitations, such
improves the sample efficiency but also enables the training of
as the need for expert knowledge to control robot motion,
a single versatile RL policy capable of handling manipulation
the low sample efficiency of reinforcement learning (RL)
tasks for various articulated objects with different kinematic
algorithms, and the significant shape variations of articulated
structures.
objects within and across different categories. Furthermore,
In particular, we design a Frame-consistent Uncertainty-
1Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing aware Sampling (FUS) strategy to obtain a condensed and
100084, China. hierarchical 3D object representation. Due to the Sim2Real
2Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai 200232, China. gap and the variance of objects and illuminations in real-
3Department of Mechanical Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing
world scenarios, the 2D segmentation network trained on
100084, China.
4Department of Computer Science, University of California San Diego. synthetic data cannot yield satisfactory results even with
5Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology domain randomization. Therefore, we introduce a method to
(BNRist), China.
estimate the uncertainty of the segmentation predictions and
∗Equal Contribution.
†Correspondence: wangguijin@tsinghua.edu.cn. analyze the consistency of points across consecutive frames
4202
rpA
62
]OR.sc[
1v20371.4042:viXra

===== PAGE 2 =====
2
to obtain a more reliable and accurate object representation. III. METHOD
Compared with traditional sampling methods, our sampling A. Overview
method preserves the object structure with higher fidelity,
We model the articulated object manipulation problem as a
resulting in a more stable manipulation policy on real robots.
Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) [19],
The key contributions of our study are as follows.
aiming to learn a policy π : O → A. The observation o ∈ O
(1) We propose a generic framework for articulated object
includes visual features and robot states, and the action a ∈ A
manipulation, which exploits the advantages of 2D seg-
indicates the robot target joint positions and the gripper finger
mentation and 3D RL. It enables learning a versatile
position. In our work, the agent employs a hand-centric camera
policy to handle different articulated objects.
to mitigate occlusion issues from third-person perspectives,
(2) We design a novel weighted point sampling strategy
showing superior generalizability for manipulation tasks in
considering both point uncertainty and consistency, which
both simulation and real world [20].
ensures a condensed object representation and reduces the
As depicted in Fig. 2, our framework develops an efficient
Sim2Real gap during policy deployment.
RL policy for various articulated object manipulation tasks.
(3) We conduct various quantitative evaluations in three Firstly, we take a hand-centric RGB-D image I ∈ RH×W ×4
articulated object manipulation tasks, both in simulation
as input. Next, our segmentation model predicts the part
and real-world experiments, proving the effectiveness of segmentation map S = {0, 1}C×H×W , where C denotes the
our framework.
number of part classes. Our Frame-consistent Uncertainty-
aware Sampling (FUS) strategy selects points based on the
II. RELATED WORK segmentation map. Finally, geometric features are extracted
from these points and fed into the RL algorithm with robot
A. Learning-based Articulated Objects Manipulation
states to predict actions and corresponding critic values.
Learning-based methods have shown remarkable progress
in vision-based articulated object manipulation. Affordance
B. Part Segmentation
learning has been proposed for articulated objects, such as
[3]–[7], [10]. Recent impressive works, such as UMPNet [6] We aim to train an efficient part segmentation model from
and FlowBot3D [7], first learn visual affordance and then RGB-D images. Note that parts can also be segmented from
use human-designed motion commands for execution with point clouds. However, in our hand-centric setting, depth
suction grippers. However, they may necessitate additional sensor noise may affect the quality of point clouds, especially
endeavors to address the grasping issue for other grippers. In when the camera is close to the object. Additionally, point
this paper, our RL approach works in an end-to-end fashion, cloud downsampling is necessary to enable efficient RL train-
demonstrating excellent performance in simulation and zero- ing. This decreases the points from small parts and degrades
shot transfer to the real world. the segmentation performance potentially.
[11], [12] estimate one or several keypoints from images to Part Definition: Our goal is to develop an object-irrelevant
guide the manipulation policy. In contrast, our method utilizes part representation that exhibits generalizability in manip-
part-guided sampled points, which significantly enhances ro- ulation tasks across various articulated objects. Similar to
bustness and leads to better generalizability on novel object GAPartNet [21], our work defines a part as a rigid segment that
instances in both simulation and real world. shares similar affordances, facilitating generalizable and con-
sistent interaction behavior. As shown in Fig. 2, cabinet doors
and drawers consist of three parts: fixed handles, door/drawer
B. Visual Pre-training for Robot Learning
facades, and fixed bases. Faucets are composed of handles and
Recent research has demonstrated the effectiveness of visual fixed bases. By adopting the generalizable part representation,
pre-training in improving robot learning [13]–[18]. Lin et al. our part-based RL method exhibits the potential to manipulate
[13] have shown that visual representations from semantic various types of articulated objects.
tasks highly correlate with affordance maps widely used in ma- Synthetic Data Generation: To generate a large amount
nipulation. Many recent works have leveraged self-supervised of annotated data, we collect data from various categories of
visual pre-training models on images to guide manipulation articulated objects in the simulation. First, We centrally posi-
tasks [14], [16], [18]. However, most existing approaches tion each object on a table and deploy a floating gripper fitted
[15], [17] require learning from large-scale, diverse, offline with a mounted camera to capture RGB-D images from di-
human videos, which is computationally expensive and la- verse viewpoints. Corresponding part masks are automatically
bor intensive. Furthermore, additional real demonstrations are generated from the simulation without human intervention.
often needed to transfer the learned policies to real-world And then, we introduce scene-level randomization to enrich
robot tasks [16], [17]. In contrast, our approach pre-trains the the dataset, including variations in the distance between the
visual representations solely on synthetic data, which can be gripper and object, camera orientation, turning angle of the
easily collected on a large scale. By incorporating domain articulated parts, and opening distance.
randomization methods, our visual model achieves excellent Domain Randomization: Domain randomization tech-
performance on real captured images. Moreover, we lift the 2D niques have demonstrated great potential in bridging the gap
representation to 3D sampled points, which further improves between synthetic and real data by increasing the data’s
the training efficiency of RL. diversity [11], [12], [22]. In our data generation process, we

===== PAGE 3 =====
3
Fig. 2. Framework Overview. 1) We take hand-centric visual observation (i.e., RGB-D images) as input and predict the part segmentation map using
a pre-trained segmentation network. 2) 3D part masked points are transformed from the depth image using the camera parameters. 3) Our proposed FUS
strategy combines uncertainty and consistency weights to generate per-point weights. These weights are used to sample points for each part. 4) Geometric
features extracted using PointNet are combined with the robot states, and fed to the RL algorithm to get the action. After the robot executes the action, a new
observation is obtained, and the process iterates from the beginning.
randomize several material parameters for the object mesh downsamples the remaining points to a fixed number. How-
models, such as metallic, roughness, and specular parameters. ever, many points of key parts may be dropped, especially
Additionally, random texture patterns are introduced on the when the part is small. Farthest point sampling (FPS) is a
surface of different objects. To further diversify the back- commonly employed strategy in point cloud neural processing
ground patterns, we replace the original black background systems [29]. However, FPS does not consider subsequent
with random RGB-D images from SUNRGBD [23] and processing steps on the sampled points and may therefore
SceneNetRGBD [24]. The introduction of large variations yield sub-optimal performance. To maintain the versatility of
during data generation effectively expands the distribution of our segmentation model for manipulation tasks, we do not
synthetic data. Several data augmentation techniques are also assume the significance of any specific part. Therefore, we aim
employed in the training phase to enhance the generalizability to sample the same number of points from each part, namely
of our segmentation network. These techniques include color N . For optimal results, points sampled from the same mask
s
jittering for RGB images, adding salt-and-pepper noise to should accurately represent its shape information and display
depth images, applying random cropping and rotation, and consistency throughout different stages of the manipulation
introducing Gaussian noise. We also simulate depth sensor policy. Therefore, our proposed weighted sampling strategy
noise during data generation to narrow the domain gap, as consists of uncertainty weights and consistency weights.
previous studies have shown its effectiveness [25]. Uncertainty Weights: Although our segmentation model
With the part masks, there are multiple approaches to guide performs well in simulation, its performance may decrease in
the subsequent RL policy learning. Many image-based RL real-world scenarios due to domain gaps between simulation
approaches [13], [20], [26] use an image encoder to extract and reality, even though we have implemented various domain
image features. However, 2D features may not be sufficient randomization techniques. Scattered and inconsistent sampled
for 3D robotic manipulation tasks that require reasoning about points can result from sub-optimal segmentation outcomes,
the geometric structure and agent-object relationships in 3D impeding the learning of subsequent policies. Inspired by [30],
space [2], [27]. Therefore, we opt for using 3D point cloud [31], we employ the uncertainty estimation method to measure
representations. Depth pixels are transformed to 3D points the potential uncertainty in the Sim2Real transfer process.
in the world frame using the calibrated camera’s intrinsic Specifically, we utilize Test-Time Augmentation (TTA, such as
and extrinsic parameters. As the original point clouds can flipping, color jittering on RGB images, and salt-and-pepper
be quite large, we apply downsampling methods to accelerate noise on depth images) to estimate aleatoric uncertainty
RL training. To ensure the reliability and consistency of the (inherent observation noise), and employ Monte Carlo Dropout
sampled points, we introduce a Frame-consistent Uncertainty- [30] to estimate epistemic uncertainty (model uncertainty).
aware Sampling strategy. First, given the input image I of the current time step, we
compute the corresponding points p in the world frame by
transforming the pixel coordinates (u, v) and depth values d
C. Frame-consistent Uncertainty-aware Sampling
using the calibrated camera intrinsic and extrinsic parameters.
There are various sampling strategies for point clouds. Next, we add TTA on I and perform K stochastic forward
Uniformly Downsampling is the most common approach [3], inferences under random dropout. Therefore, we obtain a set
[10], [27], [28]. This method first filters out table points of softmax probability map {P ∈ RC×H×W }K . And then,
k k=1
from the point cloud in the world frame, and then uniformly we use the predictive entropy to approximate the uncertainty

===== PAGE 4 =====
4
[31], summarized as …
Part 1 Part 2 Part 3
1 (cid:88) (cid:88)
P = Pc and U = − P log P , (1)
c K k k c c c … small distance w la e r ig g h e ts
w
cu
h
r
e
re
re
nt
P
ti
c
me
is
st
t
e
h
p
e
.
p
A
r
n
o
d
bab
th
il
e
ity
un
i
c
n
ert
t
a
h
i
e
nty
c-t
m
h
ap
par
U
t
∈
cla
R
ss
H×
at
W
th
i
e
s
t - 3 t - 2 t - 1 large distance
w
s
e
m
ig
a
h
ll
ts
Sampled
then normalized to [0, 1]. This uncertainty map allows us to
Points Part Candidate
assign different sampling weights to each point. Specifically, Queue 𝐐 … Points 𝒒 ! Points 𝐩 !
given the part segmentation map S and the related normalized
uncertainty score U, the part-based uncertainty and uncertainty Fig. 3. We calculate consistency weights from several consecutive frames.
sampling weights can be calculated as Candidate points closer to former sampled ones from the same part are
allocated larger sampling weights.
(cid:2) (cid:12) (cid:3)
U c = U (u,v)(cid:12) arg max S (u,v) = c , c ∈ {1, ..., C}, (2)
wua = softmax(U ), c ∈ {1, ..., C}, (3) D. RL Policy Learning
c c
As Algorithm 1 shows, an RGB-D image I is first seg-
where U
c
∈ RNc×1 denotes the uncertainty score vector of
mented into multiple parts. Then, we transform these parts into
pixels belonging to part c and N is the number of pixels. We
c 3D points p, incorporating their corresponding one-hot part-
apply the softmax function to obtain the normalized sampling
belonging encoding. Next, we conduct part-guided weighted
weights for each part.
sampling on the raw part points to acquire consistent part
Consistency Weights: The consistency of sampled points
representation pˆ . Similar to [4], [5], [27], a PointNet [32]
c
across frames is another key factor to consider. During the is utilized to extract compact geometric features Fˆ from the
manipulation process, the points in the world frame often combined part points pˆ. Consequently, Fˆ is concatenated with
remain stable across consecutive frames. Even after the ar-
the robot states g and fed into the RL algorithm.
ticulated part is moved, the points in the adjacent regions will
not change significantly. Based on the above observation, we Algorithm 1 Part-guided articulation manipulation policy
design the frame-consistent sampling weights to ensure the
Require: θ ← parameters of the segmentation model f
θ
sampled points remain consistent in the process. First, for the
while not EpisodeComplete() do
initial frame, we randomly sample N points from each part.
s I ← the RGB-D image.
Then, a queue Q of length T is kept to store the sampled
fc S ← f (I), Predict the segmentation map.
θ
points in the manipulation process. For the current time step,
p ← P ointT ransf orm(I, S).
we compute the distance vector d
c
∈ RNc×1 between the part
Get w from Eq. 6.
points p
c
∈ RNc×3 and the part points q
c
∈ RNs×3 from Q
pˆ :
(cid:83) c
pˆ ← W eightSampling(p, w )
c c c
for each part: Fˆ ← P ointN et(pˆ), Get geometric features.
(cid:2) (cid:12) (cid:3) a ← Actor(Fˆ ⊕ g), Predict action.
d
c
= min ∥p
i
− q
j
∥(cid:12)p
i
∈ p
c
, c ∈ {1, ..., C}. (4)
qj∈qc end while
As shown in Fig. 3, noticing that the points from the same
Reward Shaping: To effectively train the RL policy for
part are closer, and the noisy points are unstable and usually
common articulated object manipulation, we design a ver-
have much larger distances to the points of the specific part, we
use the distance d to calculate the frame-consistent sampling satile reward function, which includes five standard terms.
c
weights wfc as 1) Approaching term: encouraging the gripper to approach
c
wfc = 2−Kfc·dc, (5) the movable part. 2) Direction term: promoting manipulation
c of the movable part in the appropriate direction. 3) Position
where Kfc denotes the decay coefficient. term: driving the gripper to move the movable part to the
Frame-consistent Uncertainty-aware Weights: Now we target position. 4) Visibility term: encouraging the agent to
have uncertainty weights and consistency weights for each maintain visual contact with the movable part. 5) Grasp term:
part, and the total sampling weights are calculated as encouraging the gripper to grasp the handles. All terms are
utilized for OpenDoor and OpenDrawer. However, for the
w c = w c fc ◦ w c ua, c ∈ {1, ..., C}, (6) TurnFaucet task, the Grasp term is removed since grasping
is not necessary for manipulating faucets.
where ◦ denotes element-wise multiplication. Then we sample
N points pˆ from each part according to w . Then the
s c c
combined part points pˆ are put into Q, accounting for the IV. EXPERIMENTS
calculation of wfc of the next frame. To evaluate the performance of our proposed framework in
c
As depicted in Fig. 3, the consistency weights can be both simulated and real-world scenarios, we aim to answer the
recovered when erroneous part points are removed from the following research questions: (1) How does our method com-
queue. Furthermore, in our real experiments, we observe that pare to existing methods for articulated object manipulation
the presence of individual frames with inaccurate segmentation tasks? (2) How effective is our framework for real-world robot
does not significantly affect the subsequent steps. applications, particularly in addressing the Sim2Real gap? (3)

===== PAGE 5 =====
5
which refers to the number of steps averaged by all successful
trajectories.
B. Experiments in Simulation
To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed method for
articulated object manipulation tasks, we compare it against
several vision-based RL baselines. Note that all baselines only
differ in the visual representation, and all the other settings are
kept the same.
• Oracle: This baseline directly obtains the ground-truth seg-
(a) Real Setup (b) Real articulated objects mentation map from simulation, which is the upper bound
of performance for our framework.
Fig. 4. Real experimental setup and 3 categories of articulated objects for
our experiment. • Image-based RL: The segmentation map and the corre-
sponding depth map are fed into an image encoder to extract
visual features. We choose the image encoder from [26] due
How does our part-based sampling strategy compare to other
to its high efficiency for RL training. Our objective is to
traditional methods regarding accuracy and stability? (4) To
compare the part-guided image features with our part-guided
what extent is the versatile RL policy trained on three tasks
geometric features.
simultaneously effective in both simulation and real-world
• Keypoints-based RL: We follow [12] and estimate 3 key-
experiments?
points from handles. Then we put the keypoints with the
robot states into the RL policy. Different from the original
A. Experimental Setup and Evaluation Metrics work, the keypoints are estimated from hand-centric RGB-
Experimental Setup: As Fig. 4 shows, our robot plat- D images during the manipulation process, introducing
form consists of an optical table, a 7-DOF robot (ROKAE invisibility challenges. Despite this, we achieve comparable
xMate3Pro) with a 2-finger gripper (Robotiq 2F-140) mounted results (estimation error is around 1.6 cm without invisibility
on its end link, an RGB-D camera (Intel RealSense D435). and about 2.1 cm for all scenarios).
Besides, we randomly place the object in front of the robot • Dexpoint-based RL: We follow the same observation as
arm within the robot’s reachable workspace. [28] in our hand-centric setting. Specifically, the filtered
The simulation results presented in this study are obtained downsampled scene point clouds and the imagined points
using the Sapien physics simulator [33]. We select three of our gripper are concatenated with their one-hot encoding
categories of articulated objects with a single movable part as the PointNet input. The extracted geometric features and
from the Partnet Mobility dataset [33] to collect synthetic the robot states are then fed into the RL policy.
data, including 40 doors, 16 drawers, and 14 faucets. In the We evaluate all methods on three single tasks and one
RL policy training stage, 4 instances are selected from each HybridTask that contains all three categories of articulated
category. All methods are trained for 2 million steps, and objects. For each task, we train the RL policy with one
we report the training results averaged across 7 independent randomly selected object in each episode. To ensure a fair
experimental runs with randomized seeds. comparison, we evaluate the methods on one novel instance
Our visual observation consists of a single RGB-D image for each task and record their success rate over 50 trials.
captured from a hand-centric camera, with a size of 144×256. As presented in Fig. 5, our proposed framework demon-
To facilitate the RL policy training with fast segmentation strates superior performance in terms of training efficiency
inference, we follow the streamlining design in Unet [34] and stability compared to the other baselines for all single
and build it using MobileNetV2 [35] as encoders for its good manipulation tasks. For the HybridTask, our approach stands
feature representation and high efficiency. Besides, the robot out as the sole method capable of concurrently learning
states include the joint angles, gripper finger position, and end- from various types of articulated objects, attributing to our
effector positions in the robot frame. We set K, T fc, and Kfc generalizable and condensed part representation.
to 4, 3, and 40. Moreover, Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) [36] is Evaluation results is provided in Fig. 6, and the detailed
adopted as our RL algorithm. results are shown in Table I. The results indicate that our
Evaluation Metrics: We evaluate the performance of a method generalizes well on novel instances, not only for
policy by its success rate. Following related RL-based works single tasks but also for the HybridTask. In contrast, the other
[11], [28], a task trial is considered a success if the movable baselines meet a significant performance drop facing novel
part is moved at least a fixed range, typically set at 50%. Ma- instances.
nipulating the movable part to its full range poses a significant Ablation Study on Sampling Number: To evaluate the
challenge due to the constrained workspace imposed by the impact of the sampling number N on our manipulation policy,
s
fixed arm. In our work, we set the range 50% for all tasks in we conduct an ablation study on the OpenDoor task. We train
simulation. In the real world, the range is 45◦ for doors and our method with different numbers of sampling points for each
faucets, and 10 cm for drawers. In addition, we record the part while keeping all the other settings constant. The results
average success steps to evaluate the efficiency of a policy, are averaged over 7 random seeds.

===== PAGE 6 =====
6
Oracle Ours Keypoints-based RL Image-based RL Dexpoint-based RL
(a) OpenDoor (b) OpenDrawer (c) TurnFaucet (d) HybridTask
Fig. 5. Comparsions of our method with baselines on three single tasks and the HybridTask in simulation. The HybridTask involves all three categories of
articulated objects. The results are averaged over 7 random seeds.
TABLE I
THE SUCCESS RATE OF OUR METHOD AND BASELINES IN SIMULATION, AVERAGED ACROSS 7 RANDOM SEEDS AND 50 TRIALS.
Methods Image-based RL Keypoints-based RL Dexpoint-based RL Oracle Ours
OpenDoor 0 ± 0 0.574±0.197 0 ± 0 0.929 ± 0.062 0.871±0.06
OpenDrawer 0.006±0.009 0.594±0.199 0.017 ± 0.042 0.914 ± 0.061 0.831±0.107
TurnFaucet 0.294±0.182 0.246±0.168 0.243 ± 0.061 0.883 ± 0.045 0.843±0.083
Door 0.029±0.018 0.040±0.049 0.006 ± 0.009 0,791 ± 0.079 0.726±0.102
Hybrid Drawer 0.023±0.017 0.029±0.034 0.006 ± 0.009 0.857 ± 0.081 0.754±0.143
Faucet 0.080±0.043 0.009±0.015 0.009 ± 0.015 0.814 ± 0.081 0.737±0.132
In Fig. 7, we present the results of our ablation experiment
on the OpenDoor task. The performance of our method
improves with an increasing number of sampling points and
then reaches a plateau after a certain number of points.
However, note that using more points also consumes additional
computing resources. In our work, we set N to 32 to strike
s
a balance between performance and computational efficiency.
C. Sim-to-Real Transfer
We perform Sim2Real experiments to evaluate the perfor-
mance of our proposed framework in the real world. Part-
Fig. 6. Success rates of our method and baselines in simulation, averaged guided Sampling Results: Multiple sampling strategies based
across 7 random seeds. HybridDoor represents the RL policy trained on the on the segmentation map are available. One common approach
HybridTask and evaluated on the OpenDoor task. Similar meanings apply to
is Uniformly Downsampling used in 3D RL methods [27].
HybridDrawer and HybridFaucet.
Accordingly, we downsample the scene point cloud to 1024
points in our experiments. Other strategies include Score-
based Sampling, which selects the top N points from each
s
part based on their semantic scores; FPS, which samples the
farthest N points from each part; Random Sampling, which
s
randomly samples N points from each part; and our proposed
s
FUS strategy.
We compare various sampling methods and visualize the
sampled points across three consecutive frames in a manip-
ulation trajectory, as depicted in Fig. 8. The results indicate
that uniformly-downsampled points may lack crucial points
of small parts, such as handles, which can negatively affect
the manipulation task. Score-based sampled points tend to be
clustered in small circular regions, resulting in the loss of
Fig. 7. Success rate (Red) and average success steps (black) for different shape information of parts, and the positions of the sampled
numbers of sampling points on the OpenDoor task in simulation. The results points vary rapidly across consecutive frames. Furthermore,
are averaged over 7 random seeds.
none of the four alternative sampling methods, including FPS,

===== PAGE 7 =====
7
t - 2 t - 1 t
𝐹⃗
SegPred θ
UniDown incorrect (a) (b) (c)
Fig. 9. Failure Cases: (a) Failing to approach due to incorrect sampled points;
inconsistent (b) Failing to pull due to inadequate force direction; (c) Failing to turn due
Score
to being stuck on the fixed link.
incorrect TABLE III
FPS
THE SUCCESS RATE OF DIFFERENT SAMPLING STRATEGIES IN THE REAL
WORLD
incorrect
Random Methods Success Rate
Random 24 / 40 (60.0 %)
FPS 26 / 40 (65.0 %)
FUS FUS w/o Uncertainty 29 / 40 (72.5 %)
FUS w/o Consistency 31 / 40 (77.5 %)
FUS 35 / 40 (87.5 %)
Fig. 8. The sampled points of different sampling methods on 3 consecutive
real-world captured frames. The top row shows the segmentation predictions.
The bottom rows show the sampled part points with different colors.
segmentation guidance, it faces challenges in manipulating
TABLE II articulated objects. Besides, both the Image-based RL and
SUCCESS RATE AND AVERAGE SUCCESS STEPS IN THE REAL WORLD Keypoints-based RL methods exhibit a notable Sim2Real
gap, resulting in failure to perform adequately in real-world
Task Dexpoint Ours
scenarios.
0 / 40 35 / 40
OpenDoor
N/A 27.8 ± 3.2 To evaluate the effectiveness of our sampling strategy, we
Single
OpenDrawer 0 / 40 32 / 40 conduct ablation experiments on the OpenDoor task, and the
N/A 28.3 ± 3.0
results are presented in Table III. The results indicate that
8 / 40 35 / 40
TurnFaucet
25.6 ± 3.6 19.9 ± 2.7 both uncertainty estimation and frame consistency contribute
0 / 40 31 / 40 significantly to improving the performance of the framework.
OpenDoor
N/A 31.1 ± 3.8
Hybrid
0 / 40 27 / 40
OpenDrawer
N/A 30.1 ± 4.2 D. Limitations and Failure Analysis
0 / 40 32 / 40
TurnFaucet N/A 19.7 ± 4.5 Limitations: Our work assumes predefined part specifica-
tions for different types of objects, restricting its generality.
Due to the hand-centric setting, we make the assumption
Random Sampling, Score-based Sampling, and Uniformly that the handle can be seen in the initial frame. However,
Downsampling, can effectively handle segmentation errors if the policy is misled by erroneous perception results and
and misclassified handle points, which can mislead the RL deviates from the correct path, it becomes challenging to
policy. In contrast, our proposed FUS strategy accurately and relocate the handle. Additionally, our FUS strategy relies on
consistently samples points from each part, contributing to the the assumption that the object’s rigid base remains stationary
stability of our RL policy. during the manipulation process, and it may fail if certain
Manipulation Results: To evaluate the effectiveness of our regions are consistently mis-segmented (e.g., the handle) in
policy in the real world, we conduct trials on two doors, two consecutive frames. Another limitation is that our method
drawers, and two faucets. These objects significantly vary in requires careful reward shaping to guide the learning process,
size, texture, and shape compared to the synthetic data. We which may not be easily extendable to more object types.
perform 20 trials for each object, recording the success rate Finally, as we introduce more types of articulated objects,
and average success steps. In each trial, we randomly position our current training strategy becomes less effective and could
the object in front of the robot, ensuring the handle falls within benefit from improvements for more efficient training.
the robot’s operational space. Failure Analysis: Some of the failure cases are shown in
Table II reports the performance of our sampling-based 3D Fig. 9. In case (a), despite generally reliable segmentation
RL policy on the three articulated object manipulation tasks. results, the policy can be misled by erroneous segmentation
Our framework achieves remarkable results on all three tasks. of background objects as handles. In case (b), we found
In particular, RL , trained under the HybridTask, demon- that inadequate grasping is a major cause of failure in our
hybrid
strates great performance on novel instances. Despite utilizing framework. Improper grasp points often result in loose contact
the same domain randomization techniques, the Dexpoint- between the gripper and the handle, leading to suboptimal
based RL method only attains a 20% success rate on the manipulation behavior. To tackle this issue, incorporating
TurnFaucet task. This indicates that without specific part additional sensing modalities, such as force-torque sensors,

===== PAGE 8 =====
8
TABLE IV REFERENCES
THE SUCCESS RATE OF OUR METHOD AND BASELINES IN SIMULATION,
AVERAGED ACROSS 3 RANDOM SEEDS AND 50 TRIALS. [1] Y. Qin, R. Chen, H. Zhu, M. Song et al., “S4g: Amodal single-view
single-shot se(3) grasp detection in cluttered scenes,” in Conference on
Methods Oracle-3class Oracle-5class robot learning, 2020, pp. 53–65.
[2] H.-S. Fang, C. Wang, M. Gou, and C. Lu, “Graspnet-1billion: A large-
HybridDoor 0.791±0.079 0.466±0.243
scale benchmark for general object grasping,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
HybridDrawer 0.857±0.081 0.903±0.131 Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2020, pp. 11 444–11 453.
[3] K. Mo, L. J. Guibas, M. Mukadam, A. Gupta et al., “Where2act: From
HybridFaucet 0.814±0.081 0.694±0.155
pixels to actions for articulated 3d objects,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
HybridLaptop N/A 0.974±0.028 Comput. Vis., 2021, pp. 6813–6823.
[4] R. Wu, Y. Zhao, K. Mo, Z. Guo et al., “VAT-mart: Learning visual
HybridKitchenPot N/A 0.477±0.234
action trajectory proposals for manipulating 3d ARTiculated objects,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2022.
[5] Y. Geng, B. An, H. Geng, Y. Chen et al., “End-to-end affordance
learning for robotic manipulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.12941,
2022.
[6] Z. Xu, Z. He, and S. Song, “Universal manipulation policy network
for articulated objects,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 7, no. 2, pp.
2447–2454, 2022.
[7] B. Eisner*, H. Zhang*, and D. Held, “Flowbot3d: Learning 3d articu-
lation flow to manipulate articulated objects,” in Robotics: Science and
Systems (RSS), 2022.
[8] L. Ma, J. Meng, S. Liu, W. Chen et al., “Sim2real2: Actively building
explicit physics model for precise articulated object manipulation,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2023, pp. 11 698–11 704.
Fig. 10. Success rate of our RL policy on different types of articulated objects [9] Z. Jiang, C.-C. Hsu, and Y. Zhu, “Ditto: Building digital twins of
in the simulation. The results are averaged over 7 random seeds. articulated objects from interaction,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2022, pp. 5616–5626.
[10] Y. Wang, R. Wu, K. Mo, J. Ke et al., “Adaafford: Learning to adapt
can provide force feedback and enhance the policy’s accuracy. manipulation affordance for 3d articulated objects via few-shot interac-
tions,” in Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2022, pp. 90–107.
In case (c), the robot gripper occasionally collided with the
[11] Y. Urakami, A. Hodgkinson, C. Carlin, R. Leu et al., “Doorgym: A
fixed part of the object, such as the faucet base. To address scalable door opening environment and baseline agent,” arXiv preprint
this, optimizing the placement of the gripper and the hand- arXiv:1908.01887, 2019.
[12] J. Wang, S. Lin, C. Hu, Y. Zhu et al., “Learning semantic keypoint
centric camera could be beneficial.
representations for door opening manipulation,” IEEE Robot. Autom.
Lett., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 6980–6987, 2020.
[13] L. Yen-Chen, A. Zeng, S. Song, P. Isola et al., “Learning to see before
learning to act: Visual pre-training for manipulation,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
E. Analysis on the Versatile Policy Conf. Robot. Autom., 2020, pp. 7286–7293.
[14] I. Radosavovic, T. Xiao, S. James, P. Abbeel et al., “Real-world robot
To explore the versatility of our RL framework, we incorpo- learning with masked visual pre-training,” in Conference on Robot
rate two more types of articulated objects: laptops and kitchen Learning, 2023, pp. 416–426.
[15] Y. Seo, K. Lee, S. L. James, and P. Abbeel, “Reinforcement learning
pots. To exclude the influence of part segmentation errors,
with action-free pre-training from videos,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
we employ oracle part segmentation in simulation to analyze Learn., 2022, pp. 19 561–19 579.
the performance of the policy. The training and evaluation [16] A. Zhan, R. Zhao, L. Pinto, P. Abbeel et al., “Learning visual robotic
control efficiently with contrastive pre-training and data augmentation,”
results are depicted in Fig. 10 and Table IV. On average, the
in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Rob. Syst., 2022, pp. 4040–4047.
success rate decreases by approximately 12% (from 82.1% [17] Y. J. Ma, S. Sodhani, D. Jayaraman, O. Bastani et al., “VIP: Towards uni-
to 70.3%), considering all classes. Despite a certain decline in versal visual reward and representation via value-implicit pre-training,”
performance, the results prove the potential of our versatile RL in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent., 2023.
[18] T. Xiao, I. Radosavovic, T. Darrell, and J. Malik, “Masked visual pre-
policy for a broader range of articulated object manipulation
training for motor control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.06173, 2022.
tasks. [19] L. P. Kaelbling, M. L. Littman, and A. R. Cassandra, “Planning and
V. CONCLUSION acting in partially observable stochastic domains,” Artificial intelligence,
vol. 101, no. 1-2, pp. 99–134, 1998.
In this letter, we propose an efficient part-guided 3D RL [20] K. Hsu, M. J. Kim, R. Rafailov, J. Wu et al., “Vision-based manipulators
need to also see from their hands,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.12677,
framework for articulated object manipulation tasks. The main
2022.
contribution lies in the ability to learn a single versatile RL [21] H. Geng, H. Xu, C. Zhao, C. Xu et al., “Gapartnet: Cross-category
policy that can be applied across various tasks and directly domain-generalizable object perception and manipulation via general-
deployed to novel real-world instances. Simulation and real- izable and actionable parts,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recognit., 2023, pp. 7081–7091.
world experimental results demonstrate that our policy exhibits
[22] J. Tobin, R. Fong, A. Ray, J. Schneider et al., “Domain randomization
high accuracy and efficiency. for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world,”
In future work, we plan to improve our part representation in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Rob. Syst., 2017, pp. 23–30.
[23] S. Song, S. P. Lichtenberg, and J. Xiao, “Sun rgb-d: A rgb-d scene
and extend our framework to a more general manipulation
understanding benchmark suite,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis.
pipeline. In addition, we intend to refine the reward-tuning Pattern Recognit., 2015, pp. 567–576.
methods by adopting a more generalizable mechanism, which [24] J. McCormac, A. Handa, S. Leutenegger, and A. J. Davison, “Scenenet
rgb-d: Can 5m synthetic images beat generic imagenet pre-training on
may minimize the design costs and make the overall process
indoor segmentation?” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2017, pp.
more efficient and adaptable. 2678–2687.

===== PAGE 9 =====
9
[25] X. Zhang, R. Chen, A. Li, F. Xiang et al., “Close the optical sensing
domain gap by physics-grounded active stereo sensor simulation,” IEEE
Trans. Robot., vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 2429–2447, 2023.
[26] D. Yarats, I. Kostrikov, and R. Fergus, “Image augmentation is all
you need: Regularizing deep reinforcement learning from pixels,” in
International conference on learning representations, 2020.
[27] M. Liu, X. Li, Z. Ling, Y. Li et al., “Frame mining: a free lunch for
learning robotic manipulation from 3d point clouds,” in Conference on
Robot Learning, 2022.
[28] Y. Qin, B. Huang, Z.-H. Yin, H. Su et al., “Dexpoint: Generalizable point
cloud reinforcement learning for sim-to-real dexterous manipulation,” in
Conference on Robot Learning, 2023, pp. 594–605.
[29] C. R. Qi, O. Litany, K. He, and L. J. Guibas, “Deep hough voting for
3d object detection in point clouds,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput.
Vis., 2019, pp. 9277–9286.
[30] A. Kendall and Y. Gal, “What uncertainties do we need in bayesian deep
learning for computer vision?” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.,
vol. 30, 2017.
[31] G. Wang, W. Li, M. Aertsen, J. Deprest et al., “Aleatoric uncertainty
estimation with test-time augmentation for medical image segmentation
with convolutional neural networks,” Neurocomputing, vol. 338, pp. 34–
45, 2019.
[32] C. R. Qi, H. Su, K. Mo, and L. J. Guibas, “Pointnet: Deep learning on
point sets for 3d classification and segmentation,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2017, pp. 652–660.
[33] F. Xiang, Y. Qin, K. Mo, Y. Xia et al., “Sapien: A simulated part-based
interactive environment,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit., 2020, pp. 11 097–11 107.
[34] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional networks
for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Med. Image
Comput. Comput.-Assisted Intervention, 2015, pp. Part III 18 234–241.
[35] M. Sandler, A. Howard, M. Zhu, A. Zhmoginov et al., “Mobilenetv2:
Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks,” in Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., 2018, pp. 4510–4520.
[36] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Soft actor-critic: Off-
policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic
actor,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2018, pp. 1861–1870.