

===== PAGE 1 =====
Emerging Extrinsic Dexterity in Cluttered Scenes
via Dynamics-aware Policy Learning
Yixin Zheng∗1,2,3, Jiangran Lyu∗3,4,†, Yifan Zhang3, Jiayi Chen3,4, Mi Yan3,4, Yuntian Deng5
Xuesong Shi3, Xiaoguang Zhao1, Yizhou Wang4, Zhizheng Zhang2,3,(cid:66) , He Wang2,3,4,(cid:66)
1Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
3Galbot 4Peking University 5Shanghai Jiao Tong University
∗ Equal contribution † Project Lead (cid:66) Corresponding authors
Fig. 1: Given the current object state (blue), the policy aims to rearrange objects to the goal state (green). To achieve this
in cluttered scenes, the robot policy leverages extrinsic dexterity selectively. (a) The policy avoids unnecessary contacts to
minimize disturbance when free-space motion suffices. (b) When contact is unavoidable, it robustly traverses obstacles under
contact-rich dynamics. (c) It actively leverages environmental contacts to accomplish otherwise difficult manipulations (e.g.,
flipping objects). (d) The approach generalizes across diverse cluttered environments.
Abstract—Extrinsic dexterity leverages environmental contact I. INTRODUCTION
to overcome the limitations of prehensile manipulation. However,
Robotic manipulation in cluttered scenes demands strategies
achieving such dexterity in cluttered scenes remains challenging
beyond prehensile actions. Objects are often tightly packed
and underexplored, as it requires selectively exploiting contact
among multiple interacting objects with inherently coupled and occluded in cluttered environments, where incidental and
dynamics. Existing approaches lack explicit modeling of such coupled contacts are pervasive, making reliable grasps difficult
complex dynamics and therefore fall short in non-prehensile and collision-free execution highly constrained. In such cases,
manipulation in cluttered environments, which in turn limits
effective manipulation often relies on extrinsic dexterity—the
their practical applicability in real-world environments. In this
ability to selectively leverage or avoid contacts with the
paper, we introduce a Dynamics-Aware Policy Learning (DAPL)
framework that can facilitate policy learning with a learned surrounding environment through non-prehensile actions such
representation of contact-induced object dynamics in cluttered as pushing, sliding, or toppling—to achieve task goals that
environments. This representation is learned through explicit grasping alone cannot.
world modeling and used to condition reinforcement learning,
Existing non-prehensile approaches either rely on highly
enabling extrinsic dexterity to emerge without hand-crafted
specific designs or simplify away the complexity of contact-
contact heuristics or complex reward shaping. We evaluate
our approach in both simulation and real-world. Our method rich interactions. Model-based planning and hand-designed
outperforms prehensile manipulation, human teleoperation, and primitives [7, 30, 37] do not scale beyond narrowly defined
prior representation-based policies by over 25% in success rate settings, while reinforcement learning methods [23, 40] are
on unseen simulated cluttered scenes with varying densities.
typically confined to simplified contact scenarios. Even recent
The real-world success rate reaches around 50% across 10
geometry-centric representation learning approaches, such as
cluttered scenes, while a practical grocery deployment further
demonstrates robust sim-to-real transfer and applicability. CORN[8] and UniCORN[9], remain brittle when faced with
dense clutter and multiple interacting contacts. All these works
Project Page: https://pku-epic.github.io/DAPL lack explicit modeling of complex dynamics and therefore fall
6202
raM
01
]OR.sc[
1v28890.3062:viXra

===== PAGE 2 =====
short in manipulation in cluttered environments. • We introduce Dynamics-Aware Policy Learning
As discussed above, achieving extrinsic dexterity in clut- (DAPL), a framework that equips policies with a learned
tered scenes remains underexplored and challenging, as it re- representation of contact-induced scene dynamics via a
quires selectively exploiting beneficial contacts while avoiding physical world model and curriculum learning, enabling
disruptive ones. For example, a policy may need to bypass extrinsic dexterity to emerge without hand-designed
light objects (Fig.1(a)), navigate through unavoidable obstacles primitives or complex reward shaping.
(Fig.1(b)), or leverage stable neighbors to flip a target object • We extensively evaluate our approach in both simula-
(Fig.1(c))—tasks that cannot be solved by grasping alone. tion and the real-world, including a new benchmark
In such cluttered scenarios, success is not determined by Clutter6D, zero-shot sim-to-real transfer across diverse
geometry alone, but by how objects respond once contact cluttered scenes, and deployment in a practical grocery
occurs—whether they slide, topple, or transfer motion to retrieval task.
surrounding clutter. These complex interactions depend on
underlying object dynamics and cannot be reliably inferred
II. RELATED WORK
from static observations or sparse rewards. This motivates us to
decouple dynamics representation learning from task-specific
A. Extrinsic Dexterity
control and to equip the policy with an explicit, learned
representation that models contact-induced object motion. Extrinsic dexterity[11] refers to manipulation skills that
In this paper, we introduce a Dynamics-Aware Pol- augment a robot’s intrinsic hand capabilities by exploiting
icy Learning (DAPL) framework for more effective non- external resources such as environmental contacts, gravity, and
prehensile manipulation in cluttered scenes. It facilitates dynamic arm motions.[10, 19, 18] Prior work[3, 5, 6, 41, 21]
the emergence of extrinsic dexterity through contact-induced has demonstrated that complex manipulation behaviors can
scene dynamics representation. Specifically, our approach be achieved with simple grippers, including in-hand reori-
learns this representation via a physical world model trained entation, prehensile pushing, and shared grasping. However,
to predict object motion under interaction, capturing how these successes largely rely on hand-crafted trajectories, task-
contacts among multiple objects influence future dynamics. specific motion primitives, or explicit planning over contact
The learned dynamics representation is then used to condition modes, which require precise object pose estimation and ex-
reinforcement learning, enabling policies to reason about the tensive manual design. As a result, such methods do not scale
consequences of contact and to selectively exploit environmen- well beyond narrowly defined tasks or object sets. Learning-
tal interactions. We further introduce curriculum learning into based methods [37, 23, 40] increase the generalization but
the DAPL framework, which uses policy rollout trajectories still constrained to simplified scenes and brittle in cluttered,
to iteratively refine the dynamics representation. As a result, contact-rich environments. Dengler et al. [14] studies learning-
extrinsic dexterity emerges naturally rather than being hand- based pushing in clutter; however, it focuses on 2D collision
designed or shaped by complex rewards. avoidance and does not address the challenges of full 6D object
We evaluate our approach extensively in both simulation rearrangement with complex, contact-rich dynamics.
and the real-world. To enable systematic training and bench-
marking, we introduce Clutter6D, a simulation environment
B. Representation Learning for Robotic Manipulation
for 6D object rearrangement in cluttered scenes with vary-
ing densities. In simulation, DAPL significantly outperforms Prior work accelerates reinforcement learning via represen-
prehensile manipulation baselines, human teleoperation, and tation pre-training with high-dimensional observations, using
prior representation-based policies, achieving over 25% im- pretext tasks such as geometric completion, pose prediction, or
provement in success rate on unseen cluttered scenes. After contrastive learning[8, 1, 2, 24, 27]. Recent self-supervised[42,
training in simulation, our policy can be zero-shot deployed 16, 17, 39] approaches based on patch-wise transformers learn
in the real world. Across 10 diverse cluttered scenes, it strong geometric features for point clouds, but primarily model
achieves approximately 50% success—comparable to human static shape and lack sensitivity to contact and interaction
teleoperation—while demonstrating higher efficiency (mean dynamics. To better support manipulation, CORN[8] intro-
execution time 42.6s vs. 55.9s). These results highlight the duces contact-centric object representations, later extended
robustness and generalization of our method. Finally, we by UniCORN[9] to scene-level point clouds. However, these
integrate the learned policy with a high-level planner and a geometry-driven representations remain brittle in dense clutter,
grasping module to perform practical grocery retrieval tasks. where effective manipulation requires selectively avoiding
This demonstrates the applicability and potential real-world lightweight objects while exploiting heavier ones as external
impact of our approach. supports for extrinsic dexterity. Recent dynamics-aware pre-
In summary, our contributions are threefold: training methods, such as [26], learn temporal representations
• We study the problem of non-prehensile object rear- from videos in pixel space, but do not model object-level
rangement in cluttered scenes, where effective manip- physical properties or interaction forces. As a result, they are
ulation requires extrinsic dexterity to selectively leverage insufficient for contact-rich robotic manipulation that hinges
and avoid environmental contacts. on physically grounded scene dynamics.

===== PAGE 3 =====
Fig. 2: Overview of the proposed two-stage learning framework. Stage 1 (World Model Pretraining): The model takes a cropped
point cloud augmented with physical attributes (mass and velocity) as input. A Transformer-based architecture encodes these
inputs into dynamics features (f ), which are used by an MLP decoder to predict future per-point positions and velocities
dy
conditioned on robot actions. Stage 2 (Policy Learning): The pre-trained dynamics representations (f y) are fed into an Actor-
d
Critic policy network alongside proprioceptive data and task goals to facilitate efficient policy learning within a physical
simulator.
III. METHOD Architecture. As shown in Fig. 2, the world model consists
of a dynamics encoder and decoder, built upon a patch-based
Our goal is to learn a non-prehensile manipulation policy
transformer backbone. Following prior work on point cloud
that can selectively exploit or avoid environmental contacts to
transformers [8, 9, 16], we first partition the point cloud into
achieve object rearrangement in cluttered scenes. As illustrated
local patches. Patch centers are selected using Farthest Point
in Fig. 2, our framework decouples the dynamics representa-
Sampling (FPS), and each patch is formed by gathering the
tion learning stage and RL policy learning stage. Specifically,
k-nearest neighbors (kNN) of the center point. Each patch is
our framework iteratively trains: (1) a physical world model
normalized by subtracting its center coordinate. A lightweight
using policy rollout interaction data to capture contact-induced
PointNet-style encoder embeds each normalized patch into a
object–scene dynamics; and (2) an RL policy that explores in
fixed-dimensional token. To restore global spatial information,
a physical simulator while being conditioned on the learned
we add sinusoidal positional embeddings based on the patch
dynamics representation.
center coordinates. The resulting patch tokens are processed by
A. Dynamics Representation Learning a ViT, which models multi-object coupling effects. On top of
the transformer features, a small MLP decoder predicts future
To explicitly encode this physical prior, we learn a physi-
point-wise dynamics, including positions and velocities.
cal world model that predicts future object-centric dynamics
World Model Training Objective. We train the world model
conditioned on the current state and action. The world model
with dense point-level supervision. Given predicted position
serves as a physics-informed representation learner whose pˆt+1 and velocity vˆt+1, we minimize
latent features are subsequently reused for downstream policy i i
learning. L dyn = (cid:88) (cid:13) (cid:13)pˆt i +1 − pt i +1(cid:13) (cid:13) 2 2 + λ (cid:13) (cid:13)vˆ i t+1 − v i t+1(cid:13) (cid:13) 2 2 . (2)
Physical Scene Representation. At each timestep t, the state i
consists of three components: (i) the target object point cloud
In cluttered scenes, most points exhibit near-zero velocities,
Pobj, (ii) the surrounding scene point cloud Pscene, and (iii) the
leading to highly sparse supervision in the velocity field. As
robot end-effector point cloud. The surrounding scene point
a result, optimizing only point-wise velocity losses can cause
cloud is spatially cropped within a local region centered at the
the model to collapse to trivial solutions that predict uniformly
target object, focusing the representation on contact-relevant
small velocities and fail to capture contact-induced motion.
geometry while reducing background redundancy. Each 3D
To address this, we treat the scene as a point distribution
point is augmented with physical attributes, resulting in a per-
rather than independent points and introduce a variance-
point feature:
aware regularization over point-wise velocities. Specifically,
x i = (p i , m i , v i ), (1) we match the standard deviations of the predicted and ground-
truth velocity fields:
where p ∈ R3 denotes the point position, m the point mass,
i i
and v i the point velocity. L var = (cid:13) (cid:13)Std (cid:0) {vˆ i t+1} i (cid:1) − Std (cid:0) {v i t+1} i (cid:1)(cid:13) (cid:13) 2 , (3)

===== PAGE 4 =====
This regularization preserves the overall magnitude and spatial momentum transfer under realistic policy-induced distribu-
variability of motion in dynamic regions, preventing degener- tions. The refined dynamics encoder is subsequently reused
ate near-zero velocity collapse. by the RL policy, yielding improved exploration efficiency
The overall world model training objective is defined as and more stable policy learning. We repeat this alternating
procedure until both the policy performance and the learned
L = L + αL , (4)
dyn var dynamics representation converge. This curriculum allows the
where α controls the strength of variance-aware regularization. world model and policy to co-evolve, progressively shifting
from noisy exploratory interactions to task-relevant, physically
B. Dexterous Policy Learning via RL
consistent manipulation behaviors.
Observation and Action Spaces. At each timestep, the
policy observes three components: a dynamics-aware scene
representation, the robot proprioceptive state, and a task goal. D. Clutter6D: Object Rearrangement Environment
The physical scene is processed by the dynamics encoder
to produce a set of embeddings that capture contact-induced To train and evaluate manipulation policy in clutter scenes,
object dynamics. The robot proprioceptive observation consists we introduce Clutter6D, a comprehensive 6D object rear-
of joint positions, joint velocities, and end-effector poses, rangement environment and benchmark. Clutter6D is designed
while the task goal is represented as the relative pose between to explicitly stress manipulation scenarios where extrinsic
the target object and the desired goal configuration. The policy dexterity is necessary rather than optional. Increasing clutter
outputs continuous joint-space control commands, which are density not only reduces free-space motion but also amplifies
executed using an impedance controller. the coupling between object dynamics, making contact out-
Reward Design. Our reward design following standard prac- comes highly sensitive to physical properties. In such regimes,
tice in non-prehensile manipulation (e.g., HAMNet[9]), with- collision-free planning and grasp-centric strategies become
out complex engineering. The reward consists of a sparse unreliable, and successful manipulation requires selectively
task success term and two lightweight shaping terms that leveraging or avoiding environmental contacts. Compared to
encourage physical contact and goal-directed object motion. prior clutter benchmarks that emphasize collision avoidance or
The contact term r is defined based on the minimum planar pushing, Clutter6D focuses on full 6D object rearrange-
contact
distance d between the target object and the end-effector, ment with multi-object contact and dynamic coupling. The
oe
which encourages interaction: use of task-oriented scene graphs enables systematic control
over relational constraints while preserving scene diversity,
r contact = 1 − tanh(d oe ). (5) making the benchmark suitable for evaluating contact-rich
manipulation policies beyond grasping.
The goal-reaching term r measures the distance d be-
goal og
tween the object and the desired goal pose, and is activated Environment Setup. Clutter6D is built on the IsaacLab
once the end-effector distance d falls below a threshold τ : simulator with PhysX as the physics backend. We curate
oe d
high-quality object assets from Objaverse [12] and process
r = I(d < τ ) (1 − tanh(d )) . (6)
goal oe d og them using mesh simplification and convex decomposition
(PaMO[29] and CoACD[35]). Physical properties such as scale
A sparse success reward is issued when the target object
and mass, as well as semantic attributes including category,
reaches the desired pose. To penalize disturbance to the scene,
color, and material, are automatically generated[33] and ver-
the reward is discounted by the displacement of non-target
objects D measured by Chamfer distance: ified through a human-in-the-loop process. From these, we
disp
select and normalize 10K assets to tabletop scale. Task scenar-
r success = I success (1 − βD disp ) (7) ios are synthesized from object semantics and represented as
task-oriented scene graphs (ToSG)[15], which specify spatial
All coefficients and thresholds use standard values and are
relations among objects. Scenes are instantiated by placing
provided in the Appendix.
objects in topological order according to the scene graph,
C. Curriculum Learning with Policy Interaction discarding placements that violate relational constraints.
Rather than relying on a fixed offline dataset, we adopt an Benchmark Setting. Clutter6D defines three difficulty tracks
iterative curriculum that alternates between policy learning and based on clutter density: Sparse (4 objects), Moderate (8
world model refinement. We initialize the process by training objects), and Dense (12 objects). The sparse track contains
an RL policy from scratch without a pretrained dynamics 1,024 scenes for training, while each track includes 128 held-
representation. Once the policy reaches basic task coverage, out scenes for evaluation. Performance is evaluated using two
we roll out the policy to collect approximately 60k interaction metrics: (i) task success rate, where success is achieved if
steps. These trajectories are intentionally imperfect and in- the target object reaches the desired pose within 0.05 m and
clude substantial random collisions and suboptimal behaviors, 0.1 rad, and (ii) chamfer distance of non-target object offsets,
which is beneficial for exposing diverse contact dynamics. The measuring unintended disturbance to the surrounding clutter.
collected interaction data is then used to train or update the Episodes terminate upon task completion, object drop, or after
world model, improving its ability to capture contact-induced 300 simulation steps.

===== PAGE 5 =====
Fig. 3: Overview of our proposed Clutter6D Benchmark and real-world setup. (a) Representative examples of the Clutter6D
Benchmark with three levels of scene density: Sparse (4 objects), Moderate (8 objects), and Dense (12 objects). (b) The
real-world experimental setup consisting of a Franka Research 3 robot and three Intel RealSense cameras for point cloud
acquisition, along with the complete set of objects used in our real-world experiments.
IV. EXPERIMENTS 80
In this section, we evaluate our method in both the proposed 70
Clutter6D simulation benchmark and real-world scenarios.
60
A. Simulation Experiments 50
Setup and Baselines. We evaluate all methods on the Clut- 40
ter6D benchmark across three difficulty levels: Sparse (4 30
objects), Moderate (8 objects), and Dense (12 objects). We
20
compare our approach against three categories of baselines:
10
• Prehensile Manipulation: GraspGen + CuRobo [28, 34],
0
a pipeline combining grasp synthesis with motion plan- 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4
Training Iterations
ning.
• Human Teleoperation: A baseline established by expert
human operators using a Gello [38] interface.
• Representation Learning+RL Policy: We compare our
method against two types of learning-based baselines:
(i) general point cloud encoders, including Point2Vec
[22] and Concerto [42], and (ii) encoders specifically
tailored for non-prehensile manipulation: CORN [8] and
UniCORN[9]. We also include a CORN-multi baseline
which uses a CORN encoder to extract features from
each individual object and fuses them into a global
representation.
All learning-based methods share comparable policy net-
works to ensure a fair comparison. While the baselines use
only standard geometric coordinates (x, y, z) as input, our
approach leverages the full 7-dimensional physical features
(including velocity and mass), highlighting the advantage of
explicit physical reasoning and a dynamics-aware learning
paradigm rather than architectural differences.
Main Results. Table I summarizes quantitative results across
varying clutter densities, while Fig.9 shows representative
qualitative rollouts. Our method consistently outperforms all
baselines, with the performance gap becoming particularly
pronounced in the Dense setting. While geometry-based meth-
ods such as CORN achieve reasonable success in sparse scenes
(46.63%), their performance degrades sharply under heavy
clutter (22.22%). In contrast, our approach maintains a robust
success rate of 44.56% in dense environments, effectively
doubling the strongest baseline.
This advantage is further reflected in the Mean Offset (M.O.,
measured in cm) metric, which measures unintended distur-
)%(
etaR
sseccuS
UNICORN
CORN
MULTI-CORN
OURS
×1e4
Fig. 4: Training efficiency and convergence comparison. Our
method (blue) achieves significantly higher sample efficiency
compared to geometry-based baselines, reaching about 70%
success rate within the initial 104 iterations. This demonstrates
that our dynamics-aware representation provides a robust
physical prior, facilitating the rapid acquisition of complex
interaction strategies without the need for exhaustive sampling
of contact physics.
bance to non-target objects. Our method achieves a favorable
balance between task success and environment preservation.
Specifically, while the CORN baseline manages a certain level
of success, it incurs significantly higher disturbance (17.43 vs.
our 12.65) due to its lack of dynamics reasoning. Conversely,
lower offsets reported by other methods are largely artifacts
of execution failure, whereas our policy maintains the highest
success rate through precise, intentional interactions. Quali-
tatively, as shown in Fig.5, CORN relies on static geometric
reasoning and often initiates excessive or poorly directed con-
tacts, triggering unintended contact chains that cause the robot
to become stuck in clutter. In contrast, our policy exhibits more
selective and intentional interactions, exploiting environmental
contacts when beneficial while actively avoiding unnecessary
collisions. Together, these results support our core hypothesis
that static geometric representations are insufficient in dense
clutter, where momentum transfer and multi-object contact
dynamics critically determine task success.
Training Efficiency and Convergence. Beyond final perfor-
mance, Fig. 4 illustrates the learning dynamics of different
methods. Our approach demonstrates significantly higher sam-

===== PAGE 6 =====
Sparse Moderate Dense
Methods Action Type
S.R. ↑ M.O. ↓ S.R. ↑ M.O. ↓ S.R. ↑ M.O. ↓
Teleoperation [38] Mixed 50.0 3.13 40.0 7.49 20.0 21.34
GraspGen + CuRobo [28, 34] Prehensile 26.6 – 15.6 – 3.13 –
Point2Vec [22] Non-prehensile 6.89 5.09 1.95 3.36 0.78 5.35
Concerto [42] Non-prehensile 3.13 1.65 1.56 2.90 0.39 7.56
CORN [8] Non-prehensile 46.63 3.15 45.83 5.51 22.22 17.43
CORN-multi Non-prehensile 35.93 2.73 15.38 3.92 11.83 12.06
UniCORN[9] Non-prehensile 20.61 1.71 11.67 4.13 5.81 9.79
Ours Non-prehensile 71.88 2.59 51.04 2.7 44.56 12.65
TABLE I: Quantitative results measured by success rate in the simulation benchmark. Note that Mean Offset (M.O.) for
GraspGen + CuRobo is omitted because it relies on the CuRobo motion planner, which strictly prioritizes collision-free
trajectories. Our method significantly outperforms all baselines across all clutter densities, maintaining high success rates even
in dense environments where baselines experience a sharp performance decline.
Pretrain Task Granularity Velocity Phys. P.E. ↓ S.R. ↑ M.O. ↓
Recons. Point-level ✗ ✗ - 11.75 1.31
Recons. Point-level ✓ ✓ - 29.63 2.63
World Model Object-level ✗ ✗ 3.1 14.13 3.27
World Model Object-level ✓ ✓ 3.2 16.88 3.84
World Model Point-level ✗ ✗ 4.1 42.00 4.91
World Model Point-level ✓ ✗ 5.1 58.25 4.86
World Model Point-level ✓ ✓ 4.6 71.88 2.59
TABLE II: Ablation Study on Pre-training Objectives and
Input Modalities (Sparse Track). P.E.: Chamfer Distance pre-
diction error (cm). Results highlight the indispensability of
velocity and physical features, while further establishing that
point-level dynamics modeling is a more effective pretext
task than either object-level relative pose prediction or simple
reconstruction.
Fig. 5: Compared to static geometric representation base-
line CORN, which either triggers excessive contact chains
leading to significant environment disturbance (middle left)
or becomes ”stuck” due to a lack of dynamics reasoning
(middle right), our policy (bottom row) exhibits selective and
intentional interactions, successfully reorients the target while
preserving scene stability.
ple efficiency, reaching approximately 70% success within the
first few thousand training iterations. In contrast, baselines
relying on static geometric representations (e.g., CORN and
UniCORN) converge substantially slower, while other rep-
resentations fail to learn meaningful policies. These results
indicate that the dynamics-aware representation provides a Fig. 6: Visualization of our world model predictions.
strong physical prior, allowing the policy to learn effective
interaction strategies early without expending excessive sam-
ples on discovering basic contact physics. point-level dense prediction with object-level 6 DoF pose pre-
Analysis of Dynamics Representation. We conduct ablation diction leads to inferior performance, suggesting that pose su-
studies to assess the contribution of the proposed dynamics pervision is too coarse to learn the intricate contact physics and
representation (Table II). Removing physical attributes such local deformations essential for precise tracking. Moreover,
as velocity and mass leads to a substantial performance drop, replacing the dynamics prediction objective with simple au-
highlighting the importance of reasoning about the potential toencoder reconstruction significantly degrades performance,
for motion in cluttered manipulation. Additionally, replacing indicating that the effectiveness comes from dynamics learning

===== PAGE 7 =====
other than static shape reconstruction. We further visualize
world model predictions and observe close agreement with
ground-truth object motion in Fig.6, confirming the quality of
learned dynamics.
Effectiveness of Curriculum Learning. Fig. 7 shows the
evolution of policy performance across curriculum iterations.
Starting from 61.3%, the success rate steadily improves to
71.8% after three iterations. Early policies generate diverse
and imperfect interaction trajectories, which are used to refine
the world model. The improved dynamics representation then
provides more accurate conditioning for subsequent policy
learning, leading to progressively more effective extrinsic
dexterity.
75
70
65
60
55
50
iter­0 iter­1 iter­2 iter­3 iter­4
Iteration
)%(
etaR
sseccuS
Methods S1 S2 S3 S4
S.R. ↑ M.T. ↓ S.R. ↑ M.T. ↓ S.R. ↑ M.T. ↓ S.R. ↑ M.T. ↓
Teleop. [25] 3/5 77 4/5 59 3/5 39 1/5 81
Ours 2/5 51 1/5 26 3/5 33 1/5 73
Methods S5 S6 S7 S8
S.R. ↑ M.T. ↓ S.R. ↑ M.T. ↓ S.R. ↑ M.T. ↓ S.R. ↑ M.T. ↓
Teleop. [25] 3/5 28 2/5 39 4/5 20 0/5 90
Ours 4/5 37 3/5 59 2/5 24 2/5 28
Methods S9 S10 Avg.
S.R. ↑ M.T. ↓ S.R. ↑ M.T. ↓ S.R. ↑ M.T. ↓
Teleop. [25] 5/5 62 1/5 64 52% 55.9
Ours 5/5 45 1/5 50 48% 42.6
TABLE III: Quantitative results across 10 scenes. Mean (last
71.8% column) denotes average performance across all scenes. SR
70.2%
↑ indicates success rate and MT ↓ indicates mean execution
65.1% time.
62.8%
61.3%
to avoid the lightweight pie. It prevents unintended scene
destabilization by utilizing the now-heavy Pringles can as
the functional support instead. These results suggest that the
policy reasons about how interactions unfold purely through a
dynamics-aware representation rather than relying on geomet-
Fig. 7: Success rate over curriculum iterations. Performance
ric heuristics.
steadily improves from 61.3% to 71.8%, demonstrating that
iterative model refinement provides more accurate dynamics B. Real-world Experiments
conditioning for learning effective manipulation strategies. System Setups. We deploy our policy on a Franka Research
3 robot equipped with three Intel RealSense cameras. Object
Analysis of Adaptive Behavior. Beyond quantitative perfor- segmentation is initialized using SAM2[32] on the first frame
mance gains, our policy exhibits adaptive interaction strategies and tracked online with XMem[4]. Object poses are estimated
that reflect a deep understanding of contact-induced dynamics. using FoundationPose[36]. For sim-to-real transfer, we per-
We demonstrate this through a controlled experiment where form system identification of key physical parameters. Object
we maintain identical initial and goal configurations while mass is estimated using a vision–language model[33] that
modifying the objects’ physical properties. As shown in Fig.8, provides coarse physical priors, while velocities are obtained
when the pie is heavy and the Pringles can is light, the policy by temporal differentiation followed by EKF-based [20]
proactively exploits the pie as a stable anchor. It establishes filtering. To further bridge the sim-to-real gap, we employ
deliberate contact with the pie to generate the necessary torque a student-teacher distillation framework under perturbation.
for object reorientation. Conversely, if the mass assignments By training the student to recover the teacher’s latent dy-
are swapped, the policy autonomously adapts its trajectory namics from observations injected with Gaussian noise, we
force the policy to infer effective dynamics despite imperfect
perception. Although these estimates are not precise, they
provide sufficient priors for the policy to select appropriate
interaction strategies. We compare our method against FACTR
[25], a teleoperation baseline that enhances operator precision
in contact-rich tasks through multimodal sensory integration.
We evaluate performance on 10 diverse real-world cluttered
scenes. A trial is considered successful if the target object
reaches the desired pose with errors below 0.05 m and 0.1 rad
within 90 seconds. We report success rate and mean execution
Fig. 8: Adaptive behavior guided by physical priors. In identi-
time.
cal scenes, our policy autonomously adapts its interaction tra-
Results. As shown in Table III, our method achieves an
jectory based on whether the pie or the Pringles can (pink/cyan
average success rate of 48% across 10 scenes, approaching
mask) is assigned a heavy mass, transitioning between using
human teleoperation performance (52%). Notably, our ap-
objects as stable anchors versus avoiding them to prevent
proach achieves comparable success with more consistent ex-
destabilization
ecution times, demonstrating reliable real-world performance

===== PAGE 8 =====
Fig. 9: Qualitative Results in the real world. The goal pose is shown transparently.
Fig. 10: Humanoid grocery retrieval using extrinsic dexterity. Our policy enables the Galbot G1 to manipulate objects in
cluttered shelves by sliding and reorienting them into graspable configurations
despite sensing noise and modeling inaccuracies. Although often infeasible in shelf scenarios due to limited reachability
the dynamics representation relies on physical attributes such or objects exceeding the gripper’s width. In this pipeline, our
as mass and velocity, precise estimation of these quantities learned policy acts as a critical pre-grasping skill: it leverages
is not required for effective deployment. In practice, coarse extrinsic dexterity to slide and reorient the target object out
mass priors and noisy velocity estimates are sufficient for the of the clutter into a grasp-friendly configuration, enabling the
policy to differentiate between objects that can serve as stable downstream grasping module[13] to successfully complete the
supports and those that are likely to be displaced. This robust- task.
ness arises because the learned representation captures relative
and qualitative interaction outcomes rather than exact physical V. CONCLUSION, LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTION
parameters. As a result, the policy generalizes well despite
We studied non-prehensile object rearrangement in cluttered
sensing noise, perception errors, and modeling inaccuracies
scenes, where effective manipulation requires extrinsic dexter-
commonly encountered in real-world manipulation.
ity to selectively leverage and avoid environmental contacts.
We proposed Dynamics-Aware Policy Learning (DAPL),
C. Applications
which equips reinforcement learning policies with a learned
To demonstrate practical utility in unstructured environ- representation of contact-induced scene dynamics via a phys-
ments, we deploy our policy on a humanoid robot (Galbot ical world model and curriculum learning. Furthermore, we
G1) for a grocery retrieval task. The manipulation policy is introduced Clutter6D, a new benchmark tailored for evaluating
trained entirely in a digital twin of the target shelf environment 6-DoF non-prehensile manipulation across varying clutter den-
using Galbot, without access to real-world interaction data. sities, where DAPL achieves state-of-the-art performance. By
We integrate a VLM-based planner (SoFar[31]) to translate reasoning about interaction outcomes beyond static geometry,
natural language commands (e.g., “Retrieve the cracker box”) our method enables robust extrinsic dexterity; importantly, in
into 6D target poses. As shown in Fig. 10, direct grasping is real-world experiments, DAPL achieves success rates com-

===== PAGE 9 =====
parable to human teleoperation while noticeably reducing [9] Yoonyoung Cho, Junhyek Han, Jisu Han, and Beomjoon
average execution time. Kim. Hierarchical and modular network on non-
Our approach has several limitations. The dynamics repre- prehensile manipulation in general environments. arXiv
sentation relies on approximate physical attributes (e.g., object preprint arXiv:2502.20843, 2025.
mass and velocity), which may be noisy or unavailable in real- [10] Nikhil Chavan Dafle and Alberto Rodriguez. Sampling-
world settings. In addition, we focus on tabletop rearrangement based planning of in-hand manipulation with external
with rigid objects and do not explicitly address articulated or pushes. In ISRR, pages 523–539, 2017.
deformable objects, nor long-horizon multi-stage tasks. Future [11] Nikhil Chavan Dafle, Alberto Rodriguez, Robert Paolini,
work includes improving online dynamics estimation through Bowei Tang, Siddhartha S Srinivasa, Michael Erdmann,
richer sensing and system identification, extending dynamics- Matthew T Mason, Ivan Lundberg, Harald Staab, and
aware representations to articulated and deformable objects, Thomas Fuhlbrigge. Extrinsic dexterity: In-hand manip-
and integrating DAPL with higher-level planning for long- ulation with external forces. In 2014 IEEE International
horizon manipulation in complex environments. We believe Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages
dynamics-aware representations offer a promising direction 1578–1585. IEEE, 2014.
for advancing dexterous manipulation beyond grasp-centric [12] Matt Deitke, Dustin Schwenk, Jordi Salvador, Luca
paradigms. Weihs, Oscar Michel, Eli VanderBilt, Ludwig Schmidt,
Kiana Ehsani, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Ali Farhadi.
REFERENCES
Objaverse: A universe of annotated 3d objects. In Pro-
[1] Chen Bao, Helin Xu, Yuzhe Qin, and Xiaolong Wang. ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
Dexart: Benchmarking generalizable dexterous manipu- and pattern recognition, pages 13142–13153, 2023.
lation with articulated objects. In Proceedings of the [13] Shengliang Deng, Mi Yan, Songlin Wei, Haixin Ma,
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Yuxin Yang, Jiayi Chen, Zhiqi Zhang, Taoyu Yang,
Recognition, pages 21190–21200, 2023. Xuheng Zhang, Wenhao Zhang, Heming Cui, Zhizheng
[2] Samarth Brahmbhatt, Ankur Handa, James Hays, and Zhang, and He Wang. Graspvla: a grasping foundation
Dieter Fox. Contactgrasp: Functional multi-finger grasp model pre-trained on billion-scale synthetic action data.
synthesis from contact. in 2019 ieee. In RSJ International 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.03233.
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), [14] Nils Dengler, Juan Del Aguila Ferrandis, Joa˜o
pages 2386–2393, 2019. Moura, Sethu Vijayakumar, and Maren Bennewitz.
[3] Nikhil Chavan-Dafle, Rachel Holladay, and Alberto Ro- Learning goal-directed object pushing in cluttered
driguez. In-hand manipulation via motion cones. arXiv scenes with location-based attention. arXiv preprint
preprint arXiv:1810.00219, 2018. arXiv:2403.17667, 2024.
[4] Ho Kei Cheng and Alexander G Schwing. Xmem: Long- [15] Ning Gao, Yilun Chen, Shuai Yang, Xinyi Chen, Yang
term video object segmentation with an atkinson-shiffrin Tian, Hao Li, Haifeng Huang, Hanqing Wang, Tai Wang,
memory model. In European conference on computer and Jiangmiao Pang. Genmanip: Llm-driven simulation
vision, pages 640–658. Springer, 2022. for generalizable instruction-following manipulation. In
[5] Xianyi Cheng, Eric Huang, Yifan Hou, and Matthew T CVPR, 2025.
Mason. Contact mode guided sampling-based planning [16] Bala´zs Gyenes, Nikolai Franke, Philipp Becker, and
for quasistatic dexterous manipulation in 2d. In 2021 Gerhard Neumann. Pointpatchrl–masked reconstruction
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automa- improves reinforcement learning on point clouds. arXiv
tion (ICRA), pages 6520–6526. IEEE, 2021. preprint arXiv:2410.18800, 2024.
[6] Xianyi Cheng, Eric Huang, Yifan Hou, and Matthew T [17] Chengkai Hou, Yanjie Ze, Yankai Fu, Zeyu Gao, Songbo
Mason. Contact mode guided motion planning for Hu, Yue Yu, Shanghang Zhang, and Huazhe Xu. 4d
quasidynamic dexterous manipulation in 3d. In 2022 visual pre-training for robot learning. In Proceedings
International Conference on Robotics and Automation of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
(ICRA), pages 2730–2736. IEEE, 2022. Vision, pages 8451–8461, 2025.
[7] Xianyi Cheng, Sarvesh Patil, Zeynep Temel, Oliver Kroe- [18] Yifan Hou, Zhenzhong Jia, and Matthew T Mason. Fast
mer, and Matthew T Mason. Enhancing dexterity in planning for 3d any-pose-reorienting using pivoting. In
robotic manipulation via hierarchical contact exploration. 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 9(1):390–397, Automation (ICRA), pages 1631–1638. IEEE, 2018.
2023. [19] Yifan Hou, Zhenzhong Jia, and Matthew T Mason.
[8] Yoonyoung Cho, Junhyek Han, Yoontae Cho, and Manipulation with shared grasping. arXiv preprint
Beomjoon Kim. Corn: Contact-based object represen- arXiv:2006.02996, 2020.
tation for nonprehensile manipulation of general unseen [20] Rudolf E Kalman. A new approach to linear filtering and
objects. In 12th International Conference on Learning prediction problems. Journal of Basic Engineering, 82
Representations, ICLR 2024. International Conference on (1):35–45, 1960. doi: 10.1115/1.3662552.
Learning Representations, ICLR, 2024. [21] Minchan Kim, Junhyek Han, Jaehyung Kim, and

===== PAGE 10 =====
Beomjoon Kim. Pre-and post-contact policy decom- Aiden Low, AJ Ostrow, Akhila Ananthram, et al. Openai
position for non-prehensile manipulation with zero-shot gpt-5 system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.03267,
sim-to-real transfer. In 2023 IEEE/RSJ International 2025.
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), [34] Balakumar Sundaralingam, Siva Kumar Sastry Hari,
pages 10644–10651. IEEE, 2023. Adam Fishman, Caelan Garrett, Karl Van Wyk, Valts
[22] Karim Knaebel, Jonas Schult, Alexander Hermans, and Blukis, Alexander Millane, Helen Oleynikova, Ankur
Bastian Leibe. Point2vec for self-supervised representa- Handa, Fabio Ramos, et al. Curobo: Parallelized
tion learning on point clouds. 2023. collision-free robot motion generation. In 2023 IEEE
[23] Keita Kobashi and Masayoshi Tomizuka. Leveraging International Conference on Robotics and Automation
extrinsic dexterity for occluded grasping on grasp con- (ICRA), pages 8112–8119. IEEE, 2023.
straining walls. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.14721, 2025. [35] Xinyue Wei, Minghua Liu, Zhan Ling, and Hao Su.
[24] Hongzhuo Liang, Xiaojian Ma, Shuang Li, Michael Approximate convex decomposition for 3d meshes with
Go¨rner, Song Tang, Bin Fang, Fuchun Sun, and Jianwei collision-aware concavity and tree search. ACM Trans-
Zhang. Pointnetgpd: Detecting grasp configurations from actions on Graphics (TOG), 41(4):1–18, 2022.
point sets. In 2019 International Conference on Robotics [36] Bowen Wen, Wei Yang, Jan Kautz, and Stan Birchfield.
and Automation (ICRA), pages 3629–3635. IEEE, 2019. Foundationpose: Unified 6d pose estimation and tracking
[25] Jason Jingzhou Liu, Yulong Li, Kenneth Shaw, Tony of novel objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Tao, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Deepak Pathak. Factr: Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
Force-attending curriculum training for contact-rich pol- pages 17868–17879, 2024.
icy learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.17432, 2025. [37] Albert Wu, Ruocheng Wang, Sirui Chen, Clemens Epp-
[26] Hao Luo, Bohan Zhou, and Zongqing Lu. Pre-trained ner, and C Karen Liu. One-shot transfer of long-horizon
visual dynamics representations for efficient policy learn- extrinsic manipulation through contact retargeting. In
ing. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
249–267. Springer, 2024. Robots and Systems (IROS), pages 13891–13898. IEEE,
[27] Kaichun Mo, Leonidas J Guibas, Mustafa Mukadam, 2024.
Abhinav Gupta, and Shubham Tulsiani. Where2act: [38] Philipp Wu, Yide Shentu, Zhongke Yi, Xingyu Lin, and
From pixels to actions for articulated 3d objects. In Pieter Abbeel. Gello: A general, low-cost, and intuitive
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference teleoperation framework for robot manipulators. In 2024
on Computer Vision, pages 6813–6823, 2021. IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
[28] Adithyavairavan Murali, Balakumar Sundaralingam, Yu- and Systems (IROS), pages 12156–12163. IEEE, 2024.
Wei Chao, Wentao Yuan, Jun Yamada, Mark Carlson, [39] Xiaoyang Wu, Daniel DeTone, Duncan Frost, Tianwei
Fabio Ramos, Stan Birchfield, Dieter Fox, and Clemens Shen, Chris Xie, Nan Yang, Jakob Engel, Richard New-
Eppner. Graspgen: A diffusion-based framework for 6- combe, Hengshuang Zhao, and Julian Straub. Sonata:
dof grasping with on-generator training. arXiv preprint Self-supervised learning of reliable point representations.
arXiv:2507.13097, 2025. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern
[29] Seonghun Oh, Xiaodi Yuan, Xinyue Wei, Ruoxi Shi, Recognition Conference, pages 22193–22204, 2025.
Fanbo Xiang, Minghua Liu, and Hao Su. Pamo: Parallel [40] Shih-Min Yang, Martin Magnusson, Johannes A Stork,
mesh optimization for intersection-free low-poly mod- and Todor Stoyanov. Learning extrinsic dexterity with
eling on the gpu. In Computer Graphics Forum, page parameterized manipulation primitives. In 2024 IEEE
e70267. Wiley Online Library, 2025. International Conference on Robotics and Automation
[30] Miquel Oller, Dmitry Berenson, and Nima Fazeli. (ICRA), pages 5404–5410. IEEE, 2024.
Tactile-driven non-prehensile object manipulation via [41] Weihao Yuan, Kaiyu Hang, Danica Kragic, Michael Y
extrinsic contact mode control. arXiv preprint Wang, and Johannes A Stork. End-to-end nonprehen-
arXiv:2405.18214, 3, 2024. sile rearrangement with deep reinforcement learning and
[31] Zekun Qi, Wenyao Zhang, Yufei Ding, Runpei Dong, simulation-to-reality transfer. Robotics and Autonomous
Xinqiang Yu, Jingwen Li, Lingyun Xu, Baoyu Li, Xialin Systems, 119:119–134, 2019.
He, Guofan Fan, et al. Sofar: Language-grounded orien- [42] Yujia Zhang, Xiaoyang Wu, Yixing Lao, Chengyao
tation bridges spatial reasoning and object manipulation. Wang, Zhuotao Tian, Naiyan Wang, and Hengshuang
arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13143, 2025. Zhao. Concerto: Joint 2d-3d self-supervised learning
[32] Nikhila Ravi, Valentin Gabeur, Yuan-Ting Hu, Ronghang emerges spatial representations. In NeurIPS, 2025.
Hu, Chaitanya Ryali, Tengyu Ma, Haitham Khedr, Ro-
man Ra¨dle, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, et al. Sam
2: Segment anything in images and videos. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.00714, 2024.
[33] Aaditya Singh, Adam Fry, Adam Perelman, Adam Tart,
Adi Ganesh, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aidan McLaughlin,

===== PAGE 11 =====
APPENDIX Tokenization. The input scene point cloud P ∈ R1,280×7
is first partitioned into P = 40 patches using a semantic-
A. Details of World Model
aware sampling strategy. To maintain semantic integrity, we
1) Scene Representation Construction.: This section pro- independently sample 16 patches from the target object, 16
vides additional implementation details for constructing the from environmental obstacles, and 8 from the robot end-
scene representation used by the world model. Our policy effector via Farthest Point Sampling (FPS) and k-Nearest
operates on a physical scene representation P ∈ RN×7, Neighbors (k-NN, K = 32). This prevents feature cross-
synthesized from three distinct components: the target object, contamination between the robot and its environment at the
environmental obstacles, and the robot’s end-effector. To en- earliest stage. Each patch is normalized to its local coor-
sure a fixed-size input tensor while maintaining high geometric dinate system and processed through a PointNet-style Patch
fidelity, we implement a hierarchical sampling and coordinate Encoder—comprising a two-layer MLP followed by a max-
transformation pipeline. pooling operation—to generate initial tokens. By integrating
Sampling and Filtering. For each object in the scene, a spatial coordinates with mass and velocity attributes, these
canonical point set containing 512 points is pre-sampled from tokens become dynamic- before being projected into a D-
its original mesh using a uniform random sampling strategy. dimensional latent space (D = 128) and augmented with
At runtime, canonical points are transformed to the world Sinusoidal Position Embeddings to provide spatial context.
frame using the object pose T ∈ SE(3). and its specific Dynamics Encoder. The latent patch tokens are processed
scaling factor. The end-effector is similarly represented by by a Vision Transformer (ViT) backbone, consisting of 12
256 points sampled from its corresponding mesh. To han- blocks and 8 heads with a hidden dimension of 128. This stage
dle cluttered environments containing a variable number of extracts high-level spatial-temporal features Z that capture the
t
obstacles without exceeding computational constraints, we global geometric context of the scene.
employ a selection mechanism. Instead of processing the Decoder. To incorporate the robot’s action, the end-effector
entire background point cloud, we aggregate the points from flow between two frames, a ∈ R3, is projected into a
t
all environmental obstacles and retain only the 512 points latent action token and fused with the patch tokens Z via a
t
that are spatially closest to the centroid of the target object. single cross-attention Transformer layer. The resulting action-
This strategy prioritizes the most relevant local geometric conditioned tokens are then mapped back to the point-wise
constraints and contact boundaries, ensuring that the policy resolution through an unpatchify scatter operation. Specifi-
focuses on the immediate physical bottlenecks within the cally, we use the patch indices and patch centers preserved
workspace. from the encoding stage to assign patch embeddings back
Physical Attribute. To empower the policy with the capa- to their constituent points. Patch features are scattered back
bility to reason about object dynamics and inertial effects, each to the point level using stored patch indices. When a point
point p i in the aggregated scene point cloud is represented as belongs to multiple patches, features are averaged. For each
a 7-dimensional feature vector: point within a patch, its 3D offset relative to the patch center
is processed by a MLP to generate a local positional embed-
f = [x, y, z, m, v , v , v ] (1)
i x y z ding. This encoding is summed with the corresponding patch
where [x, y, z] denotes the Cartesian coordinates and embedding, yielding refined point-level features that integrate
[v , v , v ] captures the instantaneous linear velocity in the global semantic context with fine-grained local geometry.
x y z
3) Learning Objective.: The model employs parallel heads
world frame. Under the rigid-body assumption, we embed
to predict the future state of the scene. The Position Head
physical properties directly into the point-wise features by
directly regresses the per-point coordinates Pˆ for the
distributing the object’s total mass M across its sampled t+∆t
next frame, while the Velocity Head predicts the per-point
points. Specifically, each point is assigned a scalar mass value:
future velocities Vˆ . In addition, we introduce a global
t+∆t
M
velocity-variance matching term that aligns the per-dimension
m = (2)
N variance of the predicted velocities with that of the ground-
where N is the number of points sampled for that specific truth velocities, encouraging the model to capture the overall
object. This dynamic-aware encoding allows the network to distribution of motion in the scene.
implicitly distinguish between objects of different physical We decompose the training objective into three components:
i s d e e n n ta ti t t i i o e n s i a s n c d ru r c e i a a s l o f n or ab p o re u d t i t c h ti e n ir g k c i o n l e li t s i i c on sta o t u e t s c . o S m u e c s h a a nd re h p a r n e - - L pos = (cid:13) (cid:13)Pˆ t+∆t − P t+∆t (cid:13) (cid:13) 2 2 , (3)
dling complex manipulation dynamics involving varying mass L vel = (cid:13) (cid:13)Vˆ t+∆t − V t+∆t (cid:13) (cid:13) 2 2 , (4)
d fe i a st t r u i r b e u s tio a n re s. n D o u rm rin al g ize th d e u t s r i a n i g nin r g un p n h in a g se, sta a t l i l st 7 ic - s dim to en e s n io su n r a e l L var = (cid:13) (cid:13)Var(Vˆ t+∆t ) − Var(V t+∆t ) (cid:13) (cid:13) 2 2 , (5)
where Var(·) denotes the per-dimension empirical variance of
numerical stability across different physical scales.
the velocity over all points and batch samples. The final loss
2) Architecture: Given observations at time t, the model
is a weighted sum:
predicts the scene state at t + ∆t (∆t = 0.1s). The model
follows an encoder-decoder architecture: L = λ L + λ L + λ L , (6)
pos pos vel vel var var

===== PAGE 12 =====
and we set λ = 1.0, λ = 1.0, and λ = 100.0 in all where d = 0.1 m. The position error is defined as
pos vel var th
experiments. The high weight on L is crucial to prevent the
var d = ∥p − p ∥. (10)
model from collapsing to trivial, near-zero velocity predictions p des obj
and to maintain a realistic spread of motion. The orientation error is computed using the quaternion
angular distance:
B. Details of Policy Learning
d = 2 arccos (|q · q |) , d ∈ [0, π]. (11)
1) Architecture: The policy architecture is a unified r obj des r
pipeline that maps multi-modal observations, as detailed in The combined pose error is defined as
Table I, to actions through a hierarchical fusion process.
d
First, the dynamics encoder processes scene point clouds to d = d + r . (12)
extract latent patch tokens Z ∈ RP ×D. Simultaneously, an p 5
Environment State s is formed by aggregating the task Coarse Goal Tracking Reward. The coarse goal tracking
env
goal, robot joint states, physical parameters, and the last action. reward is defined as
(cid:18) (cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:19)
To integrate these modalities, we adopt a cross-attention layer d
r = I 1 − tanh , (13)
following CORN, where s env is projected into a query token to goal near σ coarse
perform cross-attention over Z. The resulting task-conditioned
where σ = 0.6.
coarse
feature z is then concatenated with s and passed
attn env Fine-grained Goal Tracking Reward. To encourage pre-
through a fusion MLP(hidden layers: [512, 256, 128]) to yield
cise pose alignment, we introduce a fine-grained variant:
a compact global representation g. Finally, g is fed into the
(cid:18) (cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:19)
d
Actor and Critic heads, both implemented as two-layer MLPs r = I 1 − tanh , (14)
with a hidden dimension of [64]. The Actor head outputs the goal-fine near σ fine
mean of a Gaussian distribution with a learnable log std, where σ = 0.3.
fine
while the Critic head provides the state-value estimate. Task Success Reward with Clutter Disturbance Penalty.
2) Training and Hyperparameters: The policy is trained Position success is evaluated on the planar distance:
within the Isaac Lab simulator using the rsl-rl implementation (cid:13) (cid:13)
of the PPO algorithm. To preserve the physical priors captured d pos = (cid:13) (cid:13) px de y s − px ob y j (cid:13) (cid:13) . (15)
during pre-training, the Dynamics Encoder is loaded with
Rotation success is defined as
pre-trained weights and remains frozen throughout the rein-
forcement learning process. Training is accelerated using 2048 d = 2 arccos (|q · q |) . (16)
rot obj des
parallel environments on an 8× L40 GPU cluster, providing a
The success mask is defined as
high throughput of diverse contact interactions and trajectory
samples. The specific hyperparameter configuration for the m = I(d < τ ) ∧ I(d < τ ). (17)
pos p rot r
PPO algorithm is detailed in Table II.
3) Reward Function: Notation. Let p ∈ R3 denote the The base success reward is
obj (cid:40)
position of the target object and p ∈ R3 denote the desired 1.0, m = 1,
des
r = (18)
target position. The object orientation and target orientation are 0
0, m = 0.
represented as unit quaternions q and q , respectively. The
obj des
left and right end-effector positions are denoted as p ee,L , p ee,R ∈ Obstacle Motion Penalty. Let N obs denote the number of
R3. non-target objects. The average displacement and rotation are
End-effector Proximity Reward. We encourage physical computed as
i
a
n
n
t
d
era
th
ct
e
io
t
n
ar
b
g
y
et
re
o
w
bj
a
e
r
c
d
t
i
.
ng
Th
p
e
ro
m
xi
i
m
ni
i
m
ty
u
b
m
etw
di
e
s
e
ta
n
nc
th
e
e
b
e
e
n
t
d
w
-
e
e
e
ff
n
ec
t
t
h
o
e
r
d¯ = 1 (cid:88)
Nobs
d , θ¯ = 1 (cid:88)
Nobs
θ . (19)
N obs,i N obs,i
object and either end-effector is computed as obs i=1 obs i=1
The normalized motion measures are defined as
d = min (∥p − p ∥, ∥p − p ∥) . (7)
ee obj ee,L obj ee,R (cid:18) d¯ (cid:19) (cid:18) θ¯ (cid:19)
The contact reward is defined using a smooth tanh shaping: dˆ = clip , 0, 1 , θˆ = clip , 0, 1 . (20)
d θ
max max
(cid:18) (cid:19)
d
r = 1 − tanh ee , (8) The combined motion score is
contact σ
contact dˆ+ θˆ
m = . (21)
where σ contact = 0.1. motion 2
Gated Object Goal Tracking Reward. Goal-related re-
The scaling factor applied to the success reward is
wards are activated only when the end-effector is sufficiently
close to the target object: s = clip (1 − 0.5 · m motion , 0.5, 1.0) . (22)
(cid:40)
1, d < d , The final success reward is defined as
I = ee th (9)
near
0, otherwise, r = r · s. (23)
success 0

===== PAGE 13 =====
TABLE I: Summary of our MDP components. †: simulation only.
State Component Symbol Dimension Description
Object point cloud P R512×7 Surface-sampled object point cloud in the environment frame, with per-point mass and
o
contact-conditioned velocity (x, y, z, m, v , v , v )
x y z
Environment point cloud P R512×7 Surface-sampled obstacle point cloud in the environment frame, with per-point mass and
e
velocity (x, y, z, m, v , v , v )
x y z
End-effector point cloud P R256×7 Surface-sampled end-effector point cloud in the environment frame, with per-point mass
ee
and velocity (x, y, z, m, v , v , v )
x y z
Hand state sEE R9 End-effector position and orientation in 6D rotation representation (3D position + 6D
t
orientation)
Robot state sq R14 Joint positions and velocities of the 7-DoF arm
t
Relative goal pose T R9 Target object pose expressed relative to the current object pose (3D translation + 6D
g
orientation)
Physics parameters† ρ R5 Object mass, object static friction, hand friction, ground friction, and object restitution
Previous action a R7 Previous-step joint-space residual action applied to the arm
t−1
Action Component Symbol Dimension Description
Joint-space residuals ∆q R7 Relative joint position commands: qtarget = q + ∆q for the 7 arm joints
t t t
TABLE II: PPO Algorithm Hyperparameters
and spatial arrangement of obstacles. Representative scenes
Parameter Value illustrating these varying levels of environmental clutter and
Value loss coefficient 0.5 task difficulty are presented in Fig. 3,Fig. 2,Fig. 1.
Use clipped value loss True Object Selection and Geometry Filtering. We curate our
Clip parameter (ϵ) 0.3
Entropy coefficient 0.006 object library from the Objaverse dataset [12], normalizing
Learning epochs 8 each object to a unit cube (1 m3) for numerical stability in the
Mini-batches 8
physical solver. To ensure real-time simulation performance
Learning rate 5.0 × 10−5
and curriculum-based scene generation, we exclude objects
LR Schedule Adaptive
Discount factor (γ) 0.99 exceeding 50, 000 vertices or 5 MB in size, and further cat-
GAE parameter (λ) 0.95 egorize the remaining assets into large (scale ≥ 0.25) and
Desired KL divergence 0.016
small (scale < 0.25) cohorts to facilitate strategic placement
Max gradient norm 1.0
of targets in environmental clutter.
Physically Grounded Initialization. A primary challenge
Total Reward. The total reward is computed as a weighted in procedural generation is ensuring objects are initialized in
sum of all reward components: physically stable poses to avoid jitter or explosive contact at
the start of a simulation. We utilize the trimesh library to pre-
(cid:88)
R total = w i r i . (24) compute a set of stable candidate orientations for each object
i based on its convex hull. For each object i, the initial pose
is defined as P = (p , q ), where the orientation q is
i,init i i i
randomly sampled from a pre-calculated stable set Q
TABLE III: Reward terms and weights used for RL training. i,stable
(comprising up to 64 candidates). This sampling strategy
Reward term Weight ensures high variance in task configurations while maintaining
rcontact 1.0
physical realism.
r goal 5.0
r goal-fine 16.0 Scene Composition and Clutter Management. Our envi-
rsuccess 2000.0 ronment supports four difficulty levels, defined by the density
σcoarse 0.6
and size of obstacles, as summarized in Table IV.
σ fine 0.3
TABLE IV: Difficulty levels and procedural object counts.
C. Details of Simulation Experiments
Difficulty Large Obstacles Small Obstacles Target
1) Simulation Scene Generation: To ensure high diversity
Sparse 1 2 1
and physical plausibility, we extend the programmatic scene Moderate 3 4 1
generation framework from GenManip [15] within NVIDIA Dense 5 6 1
Isaac Sim. Our pipeline is specifically tailored for non-
prehensile manipulation by procedurally scaling environmen- Objects are placed using a recursive search for non-
tal complexity. Specifically, we define three difficulty lev- overlapping ”on-table” relations. To ensure reachability, the
els—Sparse, Moderate, Dense—determined by the density target object’s initial position is constrained within a central

===== PAGE 14 =====
Fig. 1: Visualizations of representative scenarios within the Sparse clutter level.
Fig. 2: Visualizations of representative scenarios within the Moderate clutter level.
region defined by x ∈ [−0.15, 0.15] and y ∈ [−0.3, 0.3] meters Both the initial and goal poses are sampled from the pre-
relative to the table center. computed physically stable orientation set Q .
stable
Goal Pose Generation. For each generated scene configura- 2) Details of Baselines.: To evaluate the effectiveness of
tion, we define a suite of manipulation tasks by generating 16 our proposed framework, we compare it against several rep-
distinct pairs of initial and goal poses (P target, init , P target, goal ) resentative baselines across different categories:
for target object. To ensure a non-trivial manipulation task,
• Prehensile Manipulation (GraspGen + CuRobo): This
each goal pose must satisfy a minimum planar displacement
baseline represents a traditional decoupled approach. We
constraint:
use GraspGen [28] to generate diverse candidate grasp
||p2D − p2D || ≥ 0.15 m (25) poses for the target object from point cloud observations.
target, goal target, init 2
Subsequently, CuRobo [34], a high-performance GPU-
where p2D denotes the coordinates on the tabletop surface. accelerated motion planner, is employed to find collision-

===== PAGE 15 =====
Fig. 3: Visualizations of representative scenarios within the Dense clutter level.
Fig. 4: Adaptive Interaction under Mass Perturbations. The policy reconfigures trajectories by treating heavy objects as
stable anchors. Case A: Utilizing the heavy pie for support. Case B: Leveraging the heavy can as a mechanical pivot after
mass swapping.
free trajectories to the target. This baseline evaluates the 3D datasets and are frozen or fine-tuned to extract
limits of traditional grasping in cluttered environments task-relevant geometric features for the RL policy.
where non-prehensile strategies might be more efficient. Notably, as the Point Transformer V3 architecture
• Human Teleoperation: To establish an upper-bound per- used in Concerto poses significant computational
formance metric, we collect expert demonstrations using challenges for inference during large-scale RL train-
the GELLO [38] teleoperation interface. For evaluation, ing, we employ its Tiny variant to ensure experi-
we randomly select 10 distinct scenes from each of the mental feasibility and efficiency.
three difficulty levels (Sparse, Moderate, and Dense), – Non-prehensile Tailored Encoders: We compare
totaling 30 unique test configurations. Unlike automated against CORN [8] and UniCORN [9], which are
baselines restricted to specific modalities, the human designed to capture contact-centric features. Since
operator is permitted to employ both prehensile and the original CORN focuses on single-object tasks, we
non-prehensile strategies fluidly. implement CORN-multi: it independently encodes
• Representation Learning + RL: We benchmark against each object’s point cloud and integrates their fea-
several state-of-the-art representation learning methods tures via the State-Dependent Cross-Feature Network
combined with Reinforcement Learning (RL): mentioned in B to represent the multi-object scene.
– General Encoders: We utilize Point2Vec [22] and To ensure a fair comparison, all baseline methods share
Concerto [42] as foundational point cloud back- the same policy and value network architectures as our
bones. These models are pre-trained on large-scale approach, with the only difference being the choice of the

===== PAGE 16 =====
point cloud encoder. Furthermore, since these baselines inherently noisy and prone to estimation errors. We bridge
do not involve pre-training on physical attributes or ve- this gap through an integrated distillation framework:
locity information, they exclusively take 3D coordinates • Teacher-Student Distillation under Perturbation: We
(x, y, z) as input. This controlled setup allows us to employ a teacher-student scheme to internalize dynamics
isolate the impact of our dynamics-aware representation reasoning. During training, the teacher policy receives
learning from other architectural factors. noise-free, privileged information to learn optimal strate-
3) More Analysis on Adaptive Behavior.: Beyond quantita- gies. Simultaneously, the student, is trained to replicate
tive performance gains, our policy exhibits adaptive interaction the Teacher’s latent representation and actions. Crucially,
strategies that reflect a deep understanding of contact-induced we inject significant Gaussian noise (µ = 0, σ = 0.05)
dynamics. To rigorously evaluate this, we conduct a controlled into the Student’s input observations (coordinates and
mass-perturbation experiment using a scene containing a pie velocities).
and a Pringles can as potential interactors. We create two • Inferring Effective Dynamics: This “distillation under
contrasting settings by scaling the default mass of these objects perturbation” forces the dynamics-aware encoder to filter
by factors of 100× (Heavy) and 0.1× (Light). sensory noise and infer underlying “effective dynamics”
As illustrated in Fig.4, the resulting trajectories under iden- from temporal cues. Consequently, the policy becomes
tical initial and goal configurations are markedly different: resilient to the coarse mass estimates from GPT-5 and
• Case A (Heavy Pie, Light Can): When the pie is the jittery velocities derived from FoundationPose delta
assigned a heavy mass, the policy proactively exploits poses.
it as a stable mechanical anchor. It establishes deliberate • EKF-Refined Velocity: To further support the policy
contact with the pie to generate the necessary reaction during deployment, real-world velocities are derived from
forces for reorienting the target, while simultaneously consecutive pose differences and refined via an Extended
executing a wider swing to avoid the lightweight Pringles Kalman Filter (EKF) to provide a cleaner temporal
can, which would otherwise be easily displaced. signal matching the Student’s learned distribution.
• Case B (Light Pie, Heavy Can): Conversely, when the 3) Safe and Conservative Action Mapping: Direct deploy-
mass assignments are swapped, the policy autonomously
ment often fails due to hardware torque limits and excessive
adapts its path. It now treats the Pringles can as the
movements. Following HAMNet, we regulate robot motion
functional support, utilizing its high inertia to stabilize
through two strategies:
the manipulation maneuver while carefully bypassing the
Action Magnitude Curriculum. To encourage safe tra-
now-unstable pie to prevent unintended scene destabiliza-
jectories, we implement a decaying schedule for the action
tion.
scale of the subgoal residuals (∆q). During training, this
These results provide strong evidence that our dynamics- scale is gradually reduced from 0.1 to 0.01. This curriculum
aware representation allows the policy to reason about the guides the policy from coarse global exploration to fine-
causal consequences of interaction. Rather than relying on grained adjustments, preventing over-shooting and high-torque
static geometric heuristics, the policy decodes latent physical impacts.
properties from the point cloud sequences to determine which Cartesian-space Action Clipping. We implement a
environmental objects can be leveraged and which must be Cartesian-space action clipping algorithm to prevent high-
avoided to ensure task success and scene integrity. force impacts. We project joint-space residuals ∆q to Cartesian
D. Real-world Experiment and Sim-to-Real Deployment movement ∆x via the Jacobian J. If ∆x exceeds a bound
ϵ , the excess is mapped back to joint space using a damped
1) System Configuration: We deploy our policy on a Franka x
pseudo-inverse Jacobian:
Research 3robot arm equipped with three Intel RealSense
cameras for comprehensive multi-view coverage. Our percep- ∆q = JT (JJT + λ2I)−1∆x (26)
excess excess
tion pipeline integrates SAM2 for initial frame segmentation,
XMem for online tracking, and FoundationPose for continuous The final action, ∆q clamped = ∆q − ∆q excess , is executed
6D pose estimation. To provide physical priors, object mass by an impedance controller to reach the desired positions
is estimated via GPT-5 using a zero-shot prompt: “You are an smoothly while maintaining compliant contact.
expert in physical property estimation... estimate its mass in 4) Experimental Protocol: Success Evaluation. We eval-
kilograms.” This enables the robot to reason about dynamics uate performance on 10 diverse real-world cluttered scenes
without specialized force sensors. against FACTR. A trial is successful if the target reaches
2) Dynamics Distillation and Estimation: A primary ob- the goal (recorded via FoundationPose) within a translational
stacle in Sim-to-Real transfer is the significant discrepancy threshold of 0.05 m and a rotational threshold of 0.1 rad within
between simulation and reality regarding physical states. First, 90 seconds.
the real-world policy lacks access to privileged information Symmetry-Aware Metric. For symmetric objects where
(e.g., ground-truth mass and friction). Second, unlike the pre- orientation is ambiguous, rotational errors are computed only
cise states in simulation, real-world observations—including on the non-symmetric axes to ensure the metric reflects
object positions, velocities, and estimated masses—are functional task completion.

===== PAGE 17 =====
Fig. 5: Disturbance Avoidance: The policy bypasses lightweight objects to maintain scene stability.
Fig. 6: Obstacle Traversal: The policy manipulates the target to traverse physical barriers (e.g., sink dividers).
More Qualitative results. Additional qualitative results are
presented in Fig. 5,Fig. 6,Fig. 7.

===== PAGE 18 =====
Fig. 7: Leveraging Contact: The policy utilizes stable environmental objects as anchors to facilitate reorientation.